A Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering
Management: An Application to the Beer Game
Mohammad Hossein Fazel Zarandi1, Mohammad Hassan Anssari2,
3European Centre for Soft Computing, Supported by a Master Grant
The American Production and Inventory Control Society Dictionary defines the term supply
chain (SC) as “the process from the initial raw materials to the ultimate consumption of the
finished product linking across supplier–user companies.” Supply chain management
(SCM) literature covers wide range of areas such as logistics, production, scheduling, facility
location, procurement, inventory management, ordering management, and so on. Due to the
increasing competition in today’s global market, business enterprises are forced to improve
their supply chains to reduce inventory cost and enhance customer service levels (Wang &
Supply chain ordering management (SCOM), which is the main concern of this book chapter is
an integrated approach to determine the ordering size of each actor of SC to the upstream actor
aiming to minimize inventory costs of the whole supply chain. SCOM is focused on the demand
of the chain aiming to reduce inventory holding costs, lower slacks, improve customer services,
and increase the benefits throughout the entire supply chain (Chaharsooghi et al., 2008).
The observed performance of human beings operating supply chains, whether in the field or
in laboratory settings, is usually far from optimal from a system-wide point of view (Lee &
Whang, 1999; Petrovic, 2008). This may be due to lack of incentives for information sharing,
bounded rationality, or possibly the consequence of individually rational behaviour that
works against the interests of the group. In a few cases, the researchers' focus is placed on
the coordination and integration of inventory policies between more than three stages
(Kimbrough et al., 2002; Mahavedan et al., 1997; Petrovic et al., 1999; Wang & Shu, 2005).
When there is no coordination among supply chain partners, each entity makes decision
based on its own criteria, which results in local optimization as opposed to global optimum.
So called Beer game (Sterman, 1989) is a well-known example of supply chain which has
attracted much attention from practitioners as well as academic researchers. Optimal
parameters of the beer game ordering policy, when customers demand increases, have been
analyzed in two different situations. It has been shown that minimum cost of the chain
(under conditions of the beer game environment) is obtained when the players have
different ordering policies rather than a single ordering policy (Strozzi et al., 2007). Indeed,
most of previous works on order policy of beer game use genetic algorithms as optimization
technique (Kimbrough et al., 2002; Strozzi et al., 2007).
One ordering policy based on genetic algorithm under conditions of the Beer game
environment was introduced (Kimbrough et al., 2002); we call that GA-based algorithm in
this chapter. GA-based algorithm has some degrees of freedom contrary to 1-1 algorithm; In
the GA-based algorithm, each actor of chain can order based on its own rule and learns its
own ordering policy in coordination with other members with the aim of minimizing
inventory costs of the whole supply chain.
One limitation of the GA-based algorithm is the constraint of fixed ordering rule for each
member through the time. An attempt to mitigate the problem of fixed ordering rules was
initiated in (Chaharsooghi et al., 2008), in this study a reinforcement learning model is
applied for determining beer game ordering policy. The RL model enables agents to have
different rules throughout the time. In this book chapter we try to extract multiple rules for
each echelon in the supply chain using Genetic Algorithm.
This book chapter can be viewed as a contribution to the understanding of how to design
learning agents to discover insights for complicated systems, such as supply chains, which are
intractable when using analytic methods. In this chapter, the supply chain is considered as a
combination of various multi-agent systems collaborating with each other. Thus, SCOM can be
viewed as a multi-agent system, consisting of ordering agents. Each ordering agent tries to
make decisions on ordering size of the relevant echelon by considering the entire supply chain.
Agents interact and cooperate with each other based on a common goal. For example, in a
linear supply chain with four echelons (as considered in this chapter), there are four ordering
agents in SCOM system, each of which is responsible for ordering decisions in its particular
echelon. The main objective of ordering agents is to minimize long-term system-wide total
inventory cost of ordering from immediate supplier. This is a complex task because of the
uncertainty embedded in the system parameters (e.g. customer demand and lead-times) and
demand amplification effect (Forrester, 1961), known as ‘bullwhip effect’(Lee & Wu, 2006;
Fazel Zarandi & Avazbeigi ,2008; Fazel Zarandi et al., 2009).
Throughout this study, we use findings from the management science literature to
benchmark the performance of our agent-based approach. The purpose of the comparison is
to assess the effectiveness of an adaptable or dynamic order policy that is automatically
managed by computer programs—artificial agents. Also the results of the proposed model
are compared with two other existing methods in the literature (Chaharsooghi et al., 2008;
The rest of the book chapter is organized as follows. In section 2, the proposed GA for multiagent supply chain is described in detail. In section 3, the method is applied on different
cases and is compared with other models in the literature. Also in this section, the results are
discussed. Finally in the last section, conclusions are summarized.
2. Genetic algorithm with local search for multi-supply chain
Genetic algorithms, originally called genetic plans, were initiated by Holland, his colleagues,
and his students at the University of Michigan in the 1970s as stochastic search techniques
based on the mechanism of natural selection and natural genetics, have received a great deal
of attention regarding their potential as optimization techniques for solving discrete
optimization problems or other hard optimization problems (Masatoshi, 2002).
A Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering Management: An Application to the Beer Game
2.2 Representation of ordering policies in GA
In the proposed GA, each rules set (ordering policy) is encoded using binary system. In Fig.
2, the encoding schema is demonstrated. Each echelon in the supply chain has w rules. All
rules are represented in binary system with NumberOfBytes cells which NumberOfBytes is a
parameter of the model. The first cell in each echelon rule, stores the sign of the rule. 1 is for
positive and 0 is for negative. These cells are distinguished with grey colour. The next
NumberOfBytes-1 bits represent how much to order.
Initialization. A certain number of rules (Ordering Policies) are randomly generated
Pick the first binary rule from the current generation and decode the chosen rule to
Agents play the Beer Game according to their current decimal rules.
Repeat step (3), until the game period (say 35 weeks) is finished.
Calculate the total cost for the whole team and assign fitness value to the current
Pick the next rule from the current generation and repeat steps (3), (4) and (5) until
the performance of all the rules in the current generation have been evaluated.
Use GA with local search to generate a new generation of rules and repeat steps (2)
to (6) until the maximum number of generation is reached
Fig. 1. The pseudo code of the proposed GA
W rules –instead of one rule– enable each agent to have a more adaptive and dynamic
behaviour. The effect of different W’s on system objective function is also studied in next
Echelon 2 (Agent II) Echelon 3 (Agent III) Echelon 4 (Agent IV)
When it is needed to run a supply chain using a specific ordering policy, first it is
mandatory that the chromosome of the ordering policy –similar to that shown in Fig. 2–
decoded to decimal system. Two examples of decoding procedure are shown in Fig. 3.
In the MIT Beer Game, each player incurs both inventory holding costs and penalty costs if
the player has a backlog. We now derive the total inventory cost function of the whole
supply chain. We begin with the needed notation. In the MIT Beer Game:
INi(t) is the net inventory of player i at the beginning of period t
Ci(t) is the cost of player i at period t
Hi is the inventory holding cost of player i, per unit per period (e.g., in the MIT Beer
Pi is the penalty/backorder cost of player i, per unit per period (e.g., in the MIT Beer
Si(t) is the new shipment player i received in period t
Di(t) is the demand received from the downstream player in week t (for the Retailer, the
According to the temporal ordering of the MIT Beer Game, each player’s cost for a given
time period, e.g., a week, can be calculated as following: If INi(t)≥0, then Ci(t)=INi(t)×Hi else
Ci(t)=|INi(t)|×Pi, where INi(t)=INi(t-1)+Si(t)-Di(t) and Si(t) is a function of both information
lead time and physical lead time. The total cost for the supply chain after M periods is
1) Selection Operator: In the proposed GA, for selection of the chromosomes from the current
population, the tournament method is chose. In this method, at each time two chromosomes
are selected randomly from the current population and then the chromosome with the
minimum cost will be selected as a member of the next population. This process continues
until the required chromosomes are chosen for the new population.
2) Mutation Operator: Mutation in the proposed GA, includes the replacement of the zerocells with one-cells and vice versa. The Mutation type indicates that how many cells should
3) Crossover Operator: Crossover operator randomly chooses 2*M columns (M: Crossover
Type) from the randomly chosen chromosome from the current population. Then, the
position of two columns changes in the selected chromosome.
4) Rearrangement Operator as Local Search of GA: Rearrangement operator, first randomly
choose a chromosome from the chromosomes selected by the Selection method, then choose
two cells randomly and change the positions of those cells randomly. If the new
chromosome had a smaller cost function, then the operator adds the new chromosome to the
new population. Otherwise, the operator repeats the process until an improvement occurs.
To validate the proposed system, some experiments are designed. The experiments and
their results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. In the following, each experiment is
A Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering Management: An Application to the Beer Game
[0,0,10,1;0,0,4,8;0,0,2,2;0,1,6,5;0,01,3]
Table 1. Best ordering policies achieved by the method
In the first experiment, the performance of the multi-agent system is tested under
deterministic conditions. The customer demands four cases of beer in the first 4 weeks, and
then demands eight cases of beer per week starting from week 5 and continuing until the
end of the game (35 weeks). When facing deterministic demand with penalty costs for every
player (The MIT Beer Game), the optimal order for every player is the so-called ‘‘pass
order,’’ or ‘‘one for one’’ (1–1) policy—order whatever is ordered from your own customer.
As the result shows ([0, 0, 0, 0]) we found that the artificial agents can learn the 1–1 policy
In the second experiment, we explored the case of stochastic demand where demand is
randomly generated from a known distribution, uniformly distributed between [0, 15]. Lead
time for all echelon is a constant value through the time and is 2. In this case the model is
compared with (Kimbrough et al., 2002) as the result show, the model outperforms
In experiment 3 and 4, the influence of window basis (w) on the objective function of the
problem is studied. As it can be seen, more number of rules leads to smaller values of total
cost. This supports the idea that more number of rules enables the agents to be more
adaptive and flexible to the environmental changes.
F(x) =|Max Demand*sin(x.Π/Period)| 793.715 793.715 793.715
F(x)= |Max Demand*sin(x.Π/Period)| 744.826 774.237 762.079
F(x)= |Max Demand*sin(x.Π/Period)| 779.689 799.455 789.174
F(x)= |Max Demand*sin(x.Π/Period)| 644.872 699.865 668.943
Table 2. Comparison of models with other models in the literature
In experiments 5 to 9, the model is evaluated under more challenging conditions. The
demand and lead time are both nondeterministic and have distribution function uniform [0,
15] and [0, 4] respectively. The results are compared with 1-1 ordering policy (Chaharsooghi
et al., 2008; Kimbrough et al., 2002). The best objective function achieved by the model is
1979 which is much smaller than (Chaharsooghi et al., 2008) results (2417). Again the
positive effect of window basis can be seen as the number of window basis increases to
some extent the best objective function value decreases. A trend stops at window basis equal
to 5. This can be due to the exponential growth in the search space, which makes the search
process so complex for GA (with the current encoding schema 25*5*4 = 2100 possible
A Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering Management: An Application to the Beer Game
Fig. 4. Customer Demand in comparison with retailer
Fig. 5. Customer Demand in comparison with wholeseller
Fig. 6. Customer Demand in comparison with Distributer
Fig. 7. Customer Demand in comparison with manufacturer
In experiments 10, 11 and 12, the proposed window basis model is again compared with 1-1
ordering policy. 1-1 ordering policy is described in (Kimbrough et al., 2002; Sterman, 1989).
In all cases, the model has a better performance. The ordering values of four echelons base
on the best ordering policy achieved by the model for experiment 10 are depicted in fig. 4, 5,
In the last 4 experiments, the model is applied on a periodic function with the function of
and the impact of different window basis is studied. in this function Max Demand is 7 and
period is 8. As table 2 shows, models with window basis with the 2 multiples have a better
It should be noted that in the first 12 experiments, the genetic population is 100, the number
of generation is 400, the mutation, crossover and the rearrangement ration are 0.2. In the last
four experiments, the genetic population is 300, the number of generation is 400, the
crossover and mutation ratio are 0.3 and the rearrangement ratio is 0.2.
In this a new intelligent multi-agent system is proposed for determination of the best
ordering policy in order to minimize the cost of supply chain.
The model is compared with previous models in the literature and as the results show, the
model outperforms all the previous models.
The best ordering policy is obtained by a new genetic algorithm which is equipped with
some local searches. One limitation of the previous presented GA-based algorithms is the
constraint of fixed ordering rule for each member through the time. To resolve this problem
a new concept –window- is introduced in this book chapter. Application of the window
basis enables the agents to have different ordering rules throw the time. Experiment results
prove that the new multi-agent system is capable of finding patterns in nondeterministic
A Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering Management: An Application to the Beer Game
Chaharsooghi, S.K., Heydari, J. & Zegordi, S. H. (2008). A reinforcement learning model for
supply chain ordering management: An application to the beer game. Decision
Support Systems. Vol. 45, page numbers 949–959.
Fazel Zarandi, M.H. & Avazbeigi, M. (2008). A Fuzzy Logic Approach to prove
Bullwhip Effect in Supply Chains, Proceedings of AMERICA, Toronto, ON.,
Fazel Zarandi, M.H., Avazbeigi, M. & Turksen, I. B. (2009). An intelligent fuzzy Multi-Agent
System for reduction of bullwhip effect in supply chains, Proceedings of NAFIPS09,
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial Dynamics, Cambridge, MIT Press, Massachusetts.
Giannoccaro, I., Pontrandolfo, P. & Scozzi, B. (2003). A fuzzy echelon approach for inventory
management in supply chains. European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 149,
Kimbrough, S.O., Wu, D. J. & Zhong, F., 2002. Computers play the beer game: can artificial
agents manage supply chains?. Decision Support Systems, Vol. 33, page numbers
Lee, H. & Whang, S. (1999). Decentralized multi-echelon supply chains: incentives and
information. Management Science, Vol. 45(5), page numbers 633– 640.
Lee, H. T. & Wu, J. C. (2006). A study on inventory replenishment policies in a two echelon
supply chain system. Computers & Industrial Engineering, Vol. 51, page numbers
Masatoshi, S. (2002). Genetic Algorithms and Fuzzy Multiobjective Optimization, (Operations
Research Computer Science Interfaces Series), Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic
Mahadevan, S., Marchalleck, N., Das, K. T. & Gosavi, A. (1997). Self-improving factory
simulation using continuous-time average-reward reinforcement learning.
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Machine Learning, page numbers
Petrovic, D., Roy, R. & Petrovic, R. (1999). Modeling and simulation of a supply chain in an
uncertain environment. European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 109, page
Petrovic, D., Xie, Y., Burnham, K. & Petrovic, R. (2008). Coordinated control of distribution
supply chains in the presence of fuzzy customer demand. European Journal of
Operational Research, Vol. 185, page numbers 146–158.
Sterman, J. (1989). Modeling managerial behavior: misperceptions of feedback in a dynamic
decision making experiment. Management Science, Vol. 35 (3), page numbers 321–
Strozzi, F., Bosch, J. & Zaldívar, J. M. (2007). Beer game order policy optimization under
changing customer demand. Decision Support Systems, Vol. 42, page numbers 2153–
Wang, J. & Shu, Y.-F. (2005). Fuzzy decision modeling for supply chain management. Fuzzy
Sets and Systems, Vol. 150, page numbers 107–127.
Wang, J. & Shu, Y.-F. (2007). A possibilistic decision model for new product supply chain
design, Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 177, page numbers 1044–1061
The purpose of supply chain management is to make production system manage production process, improve
customer satisfaction and reduce total work cost. With indubitable significance, supply chain management
attracts extensive attention from businesses and academic scholars. Many important research findings and
results had been achieved. Research work of supply chain management involves all activities and processes
including planning, coordination, operation, control and optimization of the whole supply chain system. This
book presents a collection of recent contributions of new methods and innovative ideas from the worldwide
researchers. It is aimed at providing a helpful reference of new ideas, original results and practical experiences
regarding this highly up-to-date field for researchers, scientists, engineers and students interested in supply
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Mohammad Hossein Fazel Zarandi, Mohammad Hassan Anssari, Milad Avazbeigi and Ali Mohaghar (2011). A
Multi-Agent Model for Supply Chain Ordering Management: An Application to the Beer Game, Supply Chain
Management, Dr. pengzhong Li (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-184-8, InTech, Available from:
http://www.intechopen.com/books/supply-chain-management/a-multi-agent-model-for-supply-chain-orderingmanagement-an-application-to-the-beer-game
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
