International Journal of Production Research
Vol. 48, No. 4, 15 February 2010, 933–955
A machine learning approach to optimise the usage of recycled
material in a remanufacturing environment
Purvin Shaha, Abhijit Gosavib* and Rakesh Nagic
Cello Pack, 55 Innsbruck Drive, Buffalo, NY, USA; bMissouri University of Science
and Technology, 219 Engineering Management, Rolla, MO, USA; cUniversity at
(Received 6 September 2007; final version received 25 August 2008)
Remanufacturing has acquired importance in recent years because of the
increasing environmental concerns of manufacturing processes that deplete the
Earth’s resources. Some examples of remanufactured products are automobile
parts, furniture, photocopiers, and computer printers. In a remanufacturing
setup, raw materials are drawn from two sources: (i) ‘cores’, which are obtained
from recycled products, and (ii) ‘non-recycled’ or unused materials, which are
produced from minerals freshly mined from the earth. An important decision for
the manager is to select material optimally from these two sources. Using
cores has environmental benefits, and because they are cheap, they reduce
manufacturing costs. However, their use generally increases the production time,
because of the additional pre-processing usually needed, which can negatively
impact service levels. When the supply of finished products is running low, to
satisfy service levels, it makes sense to use unused material. This research
focuses on identifying an optimal strategy of switching between the two sources of
material. A reinforcement learning algorithm is used to solve the switching
problem. The switching algorithm produced encouraging results, showing up to
65% cost improvements over a policy that uses only unused materials.
Keywords: process industry; process planning; processes; process economics;
Manufacturing industry has evolved significantly since the industrial revolution. This has
led to a dramatic increase in the volume and variety of inexpensive products available
for use in our daily lives. Unfortunately, this is juxtaposed with excessive consumption of
minerals used in producing raw materials, which, if left unchecked, is bound to cause
severe shortages. In addition, at the end of their useful lives, products generate enormous
amounts of waste that are stressing landfills and resulting in hazardous consequences for
the environment and human health. Under this backdrop, recycling of products has
The recycling of products returns them to their raw material state from which they
can be reused. An example of recycling is melting a used gear, or bearing, to obtain steel,
which is then reused. This helps to conserve materials. However, the labour and energy
*Corresponding author. Email: gosavia@mst.edu
ISSN 0020–7543 print/ISSN 1366–588X online
utilised in production are lost. The material value of any product is usually only about
5–10% of the value of the final product. The remaining value consists of processing raw
Remanufacturing involves disassembly of the products into individual components,
upgrading the performance of the defective components (overhaul), and then
re-assembling the components to reproduce the product. This not only conserves the
material value of the product, but also conserves a considerable portion of the energy
utilised in production of those components. This has considerable environmental benefits.
Repairing only one or two defective components in the product is called refurbishing.
See Figure 1 for a pictorial description of the differences between recycling,
remanufacturing, and refurbishing. Remanufacturing involves not only the repair of all
the defective components, but an overhaul and upgrade of the entire product assembly.
It is clear that while recycling has smaller environmental benefits than remanufacturing,
refurbished products, usually, do not have the quality of remanufactured products.
Remanufactured products ideally match the customer requirements for a new product,
which cannot be said of refurbished products.
According to Lund and Bollinger (1981), remanufacturing of an automobile can help
to conserve 85% of its final product value. According to the RIT Website (2006), the
annual energy saved world-wide because of remanufacturing is equivalent to the electricity
produced by five nuclear power plants. Also, the amount of minerals saved by
remanufacturing is equivalent to 155,000 railroad cars completely filled, forming a train
as long as 1100 miles (RIT Website 2006). For the promotion of environmental
conservation and green manufacturing, a number of state laws in the United States are
giving incentives to companies involved in remanufacturing. The remanufacturing
industry is a $53 billion industry that includes approximately 70,000 small and mid-size
firms, and provides direct employment to 480,000 people (Lund and Bollinger 1981).
This makes the economics of remanufacturing equivalent to the entire pharmaceutical
industry in the US. Apart from the advantages of conservation of resources, the
remanufacturing industry has the potential to grow rapidly, and, hence, can lead to more
Figure 1. Differences between recycling, remanufacture, repairing, and refurbishing.
International Journal of Production Research
employment opportunities. The remanufacturing industry is expanding its horizons
rapidly, and it is also becoming profitable (Guide et al. 2000). Statistics show that 50% of
consumers prefer remanufactured products if they are 20% cheaper than nonremanufactured products (RIT Website 2006). Some prominent remanufactured products
are: automobile parts (e.g., engines, gear boxes), printers, photo copiers, furniture,
compressors used in freezers and air-conditioners, electrical apparatus, laser toner
cartridges, musical instruments (e.g., keyboards, electric guitars), aircraft parts, bakery
Remanufacturing facilities usually accept products that are ready to be scrapped. Even
after the completion of their life, products often have reusable components. These parts,
which can be used in assembling new products, will be referred to as cores in this paper.
Cores are cleaned, inspected, reworked if necessary, and then used in the assembly of new
products. Unfit cores are sold as scrap with low profit margins. Any product of which at
least one component is a used part is called a remanufactured product.
According to the RIT Website (2006), parts in a given product can be termed
‘remanufactured’ if: (1) they can be cleaned or reworked so that they have the same
characteristics as the new parts; and (2) they can be disassembled to an extent where they
can be inspected thoroughly to determine their useful lives. Remanufactured products
are almost of the same quality as products produced from fresh materials, but with
a considerably lower cost of production. It should be noted that there is a considerable
amount of uncertainty associated with obtaining cores and also in the quality of the cores
obtained. It should also be noted that lower grades of cores require a considerable amount
of time for reworking and inspection, which unused materials, procured from fresh
minerals, do not need. Thus there is a trade-off, but in the end remanufacturing is a more
environmentally responsible route, and it is expected that associated with it there are
While many of the issues of production planning in remanufacturing are similar to
those of traditional manufacturing, it is a fact that there are several important
distinguishing features that we now address (van der Laan et al. 1996, Ferrer and
Whybark 2001, Guide and van Wassenhove 2001, Kongar and Gupta 2002, Ferrer and
Ketzenberg 2004, Savaskan et al. 2004). The following features bestow on the management
of remanufacturing systems a significant amount of complexity (Guide et al. 2000).
. Uncertainty in timing and volume of returns. The time between acquiring returns
(cores) depends on how quickly the product deteriorates, its expected life, and
how quickly technology changes. The actual volume of returns is also dependent
on these factors. This has a significant influence on raw-material inventory
. System balance and materials management. A remanufacturing system has to
ensure that the rate of core acquisition is roughly equal to that of the demand;
again, this rate is dependent on technological innovation and the product’s
expected life. Also, if the outstanding demand is greater than what can be
delivered with cores, one must switch to unused materials. This makes the
materials management problem extremely complex because the system must
remain balanced in order to meet customer deadlines.
. Disassembly complexity. Different cores require different degrees of disassembly,
and hence firms in this business need a good understanding of the degree of
disassembly needed and the methods needed for disassembly.
. Core valuation. The quality of the cores varies significantly. Identical-appearing
items can return different sets of parts to be remanufactured. Also, cores have
diverse properties and lives depending on their previous use. They need to be
distinguished and graded properly, so that remanufacturing operations can be
scheduled correctly. It is very difficult to identify desirable characteristics in cores,
and extensive research is required on this subject.
. Reverse logistics network. How products are acquired from the users, incentives
offered for them to return products, and transporting these products to the
remanufacturing facility are issues that have to be dealt with by the managers of
the reverse logistic networks. Some of these issues are quite challenging.
. Matching parts. Matching the parts obtained from cores to those in the products
that are being remanufactured is a major challenge. It must be tackled
comprehensively in order to be successful in meeting demand in terms of
. Stochasticity. Because of the uncertain nature of the cores, there is a great deal of
uncertainty in the processing times and also in the actual routings on the shop
floor. This is unlike the use of unused materials where this uncertainty can be
Classical manufacturing systems differ significantly from remanufacturing systems in
. Supply–demand logistics. Traditional systems do not have any returns or reverse
flows, and the flow is to a great extent dictated by demand for finished products,
unlike in remanufacturing where it is also dictated by the supply of cores.
. Shop floor control. In traditional systems, raw materials do not have to be
processed, they are not disassembled, and routings are to a great extent
deterministic. As discussed above, the opposite is true of remanufacturing
. Inventory control. In remanufacturing systems, the raw-material inventory is
composed of cores, substitute parts, and some OEM parts; also, all part types
must be tracked. In traditional systems, one tracks WIP and finished goods only.
. Forecasting and purchasing. Demand for both cores and product has to be
predicted separately in remanufacturing systems, whereas only product demand
needs to be forecasted in classical production planning. Also, purchasing in
remanufacturing systems is a highly stochastic affair because of the randomness
inherent in the quality and quantity of cores available, whereas it is a much more
deterministic affair in the classical case.
As discussed above, the materials-management problem in a remanufacturing setting is
a complex one. An important issue as discussed by Guide et al. (2000) is as follows:
‘‘A firm may need to manufacture new items to meet demands when too few cores are
available . . .’’ In this context, we must point out that since balancing the demand and the
core availability is so challenging, in order to produce new items the manager must resort
to using unused (new materials not derived from cores) raw materials when the desired
cores are not available. The question that arises then is: when should the manager use
cores, and when should he/she switch to unused materials? Since the system is very
random, due to the random processing times of processing cores, an appropriate model
must consider stochastic elements in the system. We will show that the problem that we
International Journal of Production Research
discuss here can be set up near-exactly as a stochastic dynamic program. While heuristic
solution methods can be developed, an exact approach is clearly more attractive.
A traditional dynamic programming (DP) algorithm can be used to solve a stochastic
dynamic program. However, DP algorithms require accurate transition probability
functions, which are difficult to obtain for systems with a high degree of variability and
randomness, such as the system we consider here.
It turns out that Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a methodology that allows us to
generate near-optimal solutions to stochastic dynamic programs without the need for
transition probabilities. This is the motivation for using RL as a solution technique to this
problem. RL has a number of other features that make it very suitable for the problem
domain we consider here. RL can be implemented in a discrete-event simulation setting,
which turns out to be an appropriate modeling technique for systems with great
randomness and modeling complexity. While RL has been extensively used in machine
learning, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first use of RL in a remanufacturing
setting. A proper use of RL in a remanufacturing setup can kick-start a new field of study,
where RL could be applied to many other materials-management-related problems such as
scheduling and production planning in remanufacturing systems.
Section 2 discusses some of the relevant previous literature on remanufacturing.
Section 3 provides details of the mathematical model adopted here. The reinforcement
learning and simulation approach, adopted to solve this problem, is discussed in Section 4,
which is followed by numerical results in Section 5. Brief conclusions are presented
We present a brief review of the literature on remanufacturing starting with some of the
earliest papers and ending with some of the recent papers on the topic. Hoshino et al.
(1995) proposed a theoretical model for understanding the fundamentals of optimal
recycling plans. The main objectives of the model were to maximise the total profits and
recycling carried out by a remanufacturing facility. This problem was addressed using
a goal-programming approach. This was one of the first works related to optimisation in
a remanufacturing facility. This was closely followed by the work of van der Laan et al.
(1996), who proposed a so-called (s, Q) inventory model for remanufacturing. On the basis
of these models, the authors developed a heuristic. The paper states that disposal of
cores at disassembly is necessary in order to keep the inventory from increasing to very
Guide et al. (2000) presented an insightful paper that highlighted the differences
between inventory control in traditional manufacturing processes and in ‘recoverable’
manufacturing systems. More importantly, they explored at least seven reasons for the
uncertainty arising in the timing and quantity of returns (cores). Their focus is on what
needs to be done by the manager in order to smoothen the management of
Two important papers appeared in 2001: Guide and van Wassenhove (2001) and
Ferrer and Whybark (2001). Guide and van Wassenhove (2001) proposed a framework for
managing product returns in remanufacturing. Applying the core concepts of EconomicValue Analysis, this paper discusses the influence of reuse activities on operational
requirements. They suggest that a market-driven approach where products returned are
categorised is more beneficial for operational management than an approach where
products are returned through the waste stream. Secondly, an economic-value analysis
of reuse activities helps to justify the remanufacturing process and helps a manager in the
decision-making process. Ferrer and Whybark (2001) presented a material management
model for remanufacturing systems which is based on Material Resource Planning.
The proposed model optimises the number of parts required for assembly, the disassembly
schedule, and the number of cores procured as trade-in for finished products. Overall, this
model provides an effective material management system for a remanufacturing facility.
However, the model does not give us information on time and quantity of cores, and
Kongar and Gupta (2002) proposed an integer-goal-programming approach for
balancing the supply chain in a remanufacturing setup. The integer-goal-programming
proposed in this paper was primarily focused on providing a feasible solution for
a desirable disassembly process plan. The paper discussed two different sets of approaches:
(i) concentration on a cost revenue function, and (ii) concentration on environmental
We cite three papers from 2004: Ferrer and Ketzenberg (2004), van der Laan and
Teunter (2004) and Savaskan et al. (2004). It was suggested by Ferrer and Ketzenberg
(2004) that the decision on using cores or unused parts in assembly depends on the yield
of the disassembled parts at that time. The unused parts to be purchased may have
a longer lead time and hence a decision may be needed before the disassembly yield is
known. Their paper studies four different kinds of models to evaluate the above situation.
van der Laan and Teunter (2004) proposed heuristic methods for near-optimal inventory
control policies in remanufacturing facilities. The heuristics help in finding when the
facility should start manufacturing instead of remanufacturing. Savaskan et al. (2004)
explore a closed-loop supply chain model for the collection of cores.
We now discuss some of the more recent papers. Bhattacharya et al. (2006) present
models for retailer order quantities in the context of remanufacturing under a number of
scenarios. Zhou et al. (2006) present a kanban model for a remanufacturing system.
Konstantarasa and Papachristos (2007) present an interesting model for a system in which
both manufacturing and re-manufacturing options are allowed. They discuss a periodic
review inventory model and explicitly model a switching period from remanufacturing to
manufacturing. Geyer et al. (2007) ‘‘quantifies the cost-savings potential of production
systems that collect, remanufacture, and re-market end-of-use products as perfect
substitutes while facing the fundamental supply-loop constraints of limited component
durability and finite product life cycles.’’ They also show the need to coordinate a number
of factors within production control to obtain cost savings. A very recent paper by
Zikopoulos and Tagaras (2008) provides a mathematical model for measuring the benefits
of sorting before disassembly in remanufacturing.
It is quite clear that remanufacturing is currently a topic of significant research interest,
and because of environmental concerns is likely to become a vital aspect of the
manufacturing industry. It is also clear that although there are a number of papers
that examine logistics issues in environments where remanufacturing is already in place,
not much work has been done on quantifying the benefits of using re-manufacturing in the
context of production planning. Our paper seeks to fill this gap by examining the
application of using recycled material in a production process where, usually, unused
International Journal of Production Research
3. Problem description and mathematical modeling
The problem considered in this paper is related to material selection in a remanufacturing
facility. Before discussing details of the mathematical model, the related remanufacturing
Although a remanufacturing facility is similar to a typical manufacturing facility, it has
several distinctive features. Unlike traditional manufacturing, remanufacturing involves
different kinds of cores. The methods used in the procurement of cores depend on the kind
of setup established in remanufacturing. Cores coming into the facility can either be
purchased, like other raw materials, or may be traded-in with the customers for finished
It has been noted in the literature (Guide et al. 2000) that there is a great deal of
uncertainty in obtaining cores of desirable quality. Hence in all our models we use the
exponential distribution, which has a significant variance, to model the inter-arrival time
between successive cores to the facility. Also, as discussed previously, all cores are not
similar and they differ in their functional characteristics. Hence they need to be graded and
marked into different categories for rework. It is assumed that while procuring the cores,
they are sorted according to their merit, and stored as inventory in the facility. Also, the
unused material, which may be required in case of a shortage of cores, is stacked as
inventory in the remanufacturing facility. Hence, in one of our models, we have assumed
that there are two types of cores available.
Figure 2 shows the different types of raw materials available for use, which are core 1,
core 2, etc., and unused raw material. One can consider different bins of raw materials
Figure 2. Remanufacturing environment with two parts (x and y) at the assembly station.
inventory in the remanufacturing facility. Any finished product consisting of cores is
considered to be a remanufactured product. If no cores are available, manufacturing
is carried out using unused raw materials. The decision related to selection of raw materials
is not simple, and an incorrect selection of raw material can lead to reduction of profits.
Cores require time for rework and inspection. Hence cores can take additional production
time, which is not needed with unused material. If the rate of arrival of demand for
finished goods is high, then the additional time consumed by cores can result in
cancellation of orders and revenue loss. It is wise to use unused material instead of cores
if the finished goods inventory is at low levels. On the contrary, if finished goods inventory
is sufficiently high, then using cores makes business sense. For the manager of
a remanufacturing facility, one of the most important decisions required is to select the
kind of raw material to be used – in order to ensure that profits are not diminished and, at
the same time, cores are used at an optimal level.
There exists a trade-off between conservation of energy and profits of a company.
The factors affecting this trade-off need to be addressed and controlled. The manager has
to be aware of the profits associated with the selection of any given type of raw material.
Selection of raw material should be based on factors affecting this trade-off. Monitoring
the service level of the facility can help determine the rate of demand for finished goods,
and this information can be utilised in the selection of raw material. Also, the inventory
level of the final product provides information about the rate of demand. Monitoring
inventory levels gives better control in evaluating the demand for the final product.
It makes sense for the manager to determine the nature of the raw material to be used by
observing the amount of finished-goods inventory.
This production system involves a number of random variables, such as (i) the time
between arrivals of raw materials, (ii) the time required for repair operations, (iii) the time
required for assembly operations, and (iv) the time between demand arrivals for finished
products. All these random variables together make this system a complex one, which
requires a sophisticated mathematical approach for analysis. In the next section, a semiMarkov decision model will be presented to solve the material-selection problem discussed
A SMDP (semi-Markov decision problem) consists of five elements (S, p, A, r, t) (Bertsekas
1995), where S denotes the set of states, A denotes the set of actions, p denotes the
transition probability function, r denotes the transition reward function, and t denotes the
transition time function. Consider a stochastic process (X, T )  {Xn, Tn : n 2 N } where
Xn 2 S and Tn 2 Rþ where Rþ ¼ [0, 1]. Here Xn denotes the state of the system in the nth
decision epoch and Tn the time at the nth decision epoch.
The above process is said to satisfy the following semi-Markovian condition if
PfXnþ1 ¼ j, Tnþ1  Tn  t j X0 , . . . , Xn , T0 , . . . , Tn g
International Journal of Production Research
where the notation P{. j .} denotes a conditional probability in which the values of the
variables in the condition are assumed to be known. Here, the finished goods inventory
level is used as the state of the system.
In the SMDP, at every decision-making epoch, the decision maker (manager) has
to select the action that controls the path of the stochastic process. For instance, in
the remanufacturing problem, the manager of the remanufacturing facility must decide
which raw material is to be used for the assembly process. A solution of a SMDP is
called a policy. If  denotes a policy, then (i) will denote the action chosen in state i.
The goal of the SMDP is to find an optimal policy that minimises some performance
metric (measure), e.g. long-run average cost per unit time. We now present some details
3.3.1 Transition probability function p(., ., .)
The transition probability denotes the chance of going from one state to another
for a specific action. Now, p(i, a, j) will denote the transition probability of going from
state i to state j under the condition that action a is selected in state i. Transition
probabilities of complex systems are difficult to find. This issue will be discussed in detail
On the successful completion of a transition from one state to another, the given action
based on its performance is either rewarded or punished. In our example we have costs
incurred while the transitions are in progress. Thus at the end of each transition, the
accumulated costs are assigned to the specified action as fixed penalties. Now, r(i, a, j) will
denote the cost incurred from state i to state j under the condition that action a is selected
One of the distinctive features of a SMDP that makes it different from a MDP (Markov
decision problem) is that the SMDP incorporates the time function in its reward
calculations. Here, t(i, a, j) will denote the transition time in going from state i to state j
given that action a is chosen in state i.
Let ik represent the kth decision-making epoch, and if policy  is pursued, (ik)
will denote the action taken in that epoch. Then, under a policy  with s as the
starting state, the average cost of the SMDP, which is to be minimised, is given
It is well known that if the underlying Markov chains are recurrent and irreducible, the
The long-run discounted cost for policy  starting at state s is defined as
where the continuous-time discount factor, k, in the kth epoch is defined as
k ¼ exp(t(ik, ak, ikþ1)), where ak is the action chosen in the kth epoch. It is well
known that, as the discount factor tends to 1, i.e. as  ! 0, optimising with  (s) for all s is
The well-known Bellman’s equation for a SMDP is given as follows. For every state i 2 S,
there exists a scalar, v*(i), that satisfies
where Fi,a(t) denotes the sojourn-time distribution for (i, a). It has also been established
(Bertsekas 1995) that the policy defined as follows for all i 2 S,
The value iteration algorithm provides a mechanism to obtain approximate estimates
of v*. As mentioned before, the remanufacturing system is a complex one, the transition
probabilities of which are hard to find. If it were possible to compute the transition
probabilities, the value iteration algorithm would have been an excellent choice to solve
the raw-material selection under the given conditions. However, since the transition
probabilities are not available, an alternative algorithm that can do without transition
probabilities must be used. As stated above, Reinforcement Learning (RL) is one method
that does not require transition probabilities, but generates near-optimal solutions.
RL is an artificial intelligence algorithm that can easily be incorporated into simulation
models. Also, as stated before, it does not require the transition probabilities between
the states. RL is often described as a technique used in teaching an agent how to act by
rewarding and punishing it on a continuous basis (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996, Sutton
and Barto 1998, Gosavi 2003). A popular algorithm called Q-learning is due to Watkins
(1989). It has been extended to semi-Markov problems by Bradtke and Duff (1995), where
they use a continuous cost rate; Gosavi (2003) consider a lump sum cost. We use the
algorithm from Gosavi (2003) for semi-Markov problems in this paper.
International Journal of Production Research
Figure 3. Schematic showing how RL works.
Within a simulation run of a RL algorithm, the system gradually learns (decides) which
decision is the best. At the end of each state transition, the knowledge base of the
algorithm is updated. The knowledge base of the RL algorithm is composed of Q-factors,
which share the following relationship with the value function of dynamic programming.
where Q*(i, a) denotes the optimal Q-factor for state i and action a and A(i) is the set of
actions allowed in state i. As shown in Figure 3, the agent learns via trial and error
by visiting each state several times. At the end of the learning process, one has the optimal
Q-factors for each state. From the optimal Q-factors, the optimal policy, *, can be
As discussed above, RL is a viable alternative to the value iteration algorithm. A RL
algorithm for solving the discounted cost SMDP (introduced by Gosavi (2003) and
convergence proved by Gosavi (2007)) is described below.
. Step I. Set the iteration count, k, to 0. Initialise action values Qk(i, u) ¼ 0 for all
i 2 S and u 2 A(i). Set  to a small number less than 1. Start system simulation.
. Step II. While m 5 MAX-STEPS doIf the system starts at iteration k is i 2 S,
1: With a probability of 1/jA(i)j, choose an action a 2 A(i) that minimises Qk(i, a).
2: Simulate the chosen action a. Let the system state at the next decision epoch be j.
Also, let t(i, a, j) be the transition time, and r(i, a, j) be the immediate cost incurred
in the transition resulting from taking action a in state i.
ð1  ÞQk ði, aÞ þ  rði, a, jÞ þ etði,a, jÞ min Qk ð j, bÞ :
4: Set the current state i to the new state j. Also, decay , and increment k by 1, then
The decay of  is done according to the rule  ¼ 1/k. For other rules, see Gosavi (2003).
RL works in a simulator, and at the end of the learning process provides the optimal
Q-factors for each state. From the optimal Q-factors, the optimal raw-material selection
policy for each state of the remanufacturing environment can be obtained.
The RL algorithm is centred on updating the Q-factor values. The Q-factors
are updated in a process that requires the reward function r(i, a, j) and the time
function t(i, a, j). Note, however, the transition probabilities, p(i, a, j), are not required.
An alternative to RL is to use a ‘brute-force’ simulation model to determine the
performance of a given switching policy. Clearly, this approach is feasible when the state
space is small, so that the set of switching policies is small.
The simulator used here is designed using the ARENA software. The simulator consists of
different modules, and each module has a specific function to perform. Three different
classes of realistic scenarios are tested and analysed in this simulation. Different scenarios
require different modules to obtain the final output from the simulator. These modules are
A small-size real-world problem is studied as Model X. The remanufacturing facility
simulated is assumed to have only one kind of core in the facility in addition to unused
material. The outputs from the RL algorithm simulation are the Q-factors, which can be
collectively analysed to derive the optimal switching policy for selection of raw materials.
Model X is a small-scale problem, and it can also be studied via brute-force simulation.
Only two actions are possible in this situation: selecting cores as raw material and selecting
unused material. In the brute-force approach, every possible switching policy is simulated.
The simulation is run for a long duration of time until the average cost stabilises.
In Model Y, the manager has to choose from two different grades of cores, named A and B,
and, of course, unused material. Thus, here, the manager has additional options available
for raw-material selection. With the increase in the available options, the size of the
problem expands drastically. The RL algorithm can be implemented as before; however,
due to the large size of the problem, validation with a brute-force simulation is not
In the previous two models, only one component was required for the assembly process
from the remanufacturing stream. In this model, two distinct types of component parts,
named I and II, will be assumed to be needed for the assembly process from the
remanufacturing stream. Each of these required components can be selected from their
respective core stocks or their unused material stocks. Since the assembly cannot take
International Journal of Production Research
place without the availability of both the components at the assembly station, selection of
one component as a core or unused material may delay the final production, depending
upon the repair time and their availabilities.
The designed simulator has a number of modules depending on the scenario being
simulated. A broad classification of the modules is as follows.
Cores are generally bought by trading-off finished products. The arrival of cores in the
simulation is represented by the generation of entities. The inter-arrival time of cores is
assumed to be exponentially distributed in the simulation. See Figure 4.
Unused materials are procured from outside suppliers. These materials are procured using
a periodic-review order-up-to-R policy for inventory control. See Figure 5.
The demand for the final product in the remanufacturing facility simulation is generated
with a Poisson process. Demand generation and the rate of production are adjusted to
Figure 5. Unused material procurement module in ARENA.
Figure 6. Demand generation for finished-goods module in ARENA.
have a stable system. As shown in Figure 6, as soon as the demand is created, a check is
performed to determine whether this demand can be satisfied by available inventory of
finished goods. If finished goods are available, the demand is met; otherwise the demand is
back-ordered, and a penalty is imposed on the system. When the finished product becomes
available, the back-orders are satisfied in the order in which they were recorded.
Figures 7, 8, and 9 display the ARENA agent modules for Models X, Y, and Z,
respectively. The decision of raw-material selection is incorporated into this module.
The repair and assembly blocks have uniformly distributed time delays, which are different
for the different systems studied. The Q-factor values for different polices and the average
cost of simulation are also computed in this module.
This module is required to collect the data generated during the simulation. It writes the
Q-factor values into a file at the end of the simulation run. For the validation of the
simulation in Model X, the average cost is also written into a file at the end of each
In this section, we describe the results of experiments performed with RL and a simulator
of the remanufacturing environment. As described in the previous section, Models X, Y,
Table 1 describes the cases (systems) studied for Model X and also enumerates the
optimal switching points for RL and a brute-force analysis. Here a periodic review
inventory control for the unused material’s procurement uses 1 day as the period and
order-up-to-10 units as the policy. The switching points in the last two columns of Table 1
are from the core to unused material. Tables 2 and 3 list the cases for Models Y and Z.
Table 4 enumerates the Q-factors for Case 1 of Model X. A trend can be observed from
the values of the Q-factors. The Q-factors for unused material have lower values than those
of the cores until state 4. At state 5 and above, the Q-factors for unused material are higher
than those for the cores. Thus the results of the RL algorithm suggest that a switching
Figure 7. Production module in ARENA for Model X.
International Journal of Production Research
Figure 8. Production module in ARENA for Model Y.
International Journal of Production Research
Figure 9. Production module in ARENA for Model Z.
Figure 10. Data collection module in ARENA.
point exists at state 4. In other words, RL recommends switching from the core to unused
material when the finished goods inventory falls to 4 or below. For every case in Table 1,
a similar switching trend was observed; however, we do not show the actual Q-factor
values for every case. Brute-force simulation is used to compute the average cost for all
switching points. Figure 11 shows the average cost at each switching point for Case 1
obtained via brute force. From the graph it is obvious that the least average cost is for
switching at state 6. Thus, clearly, RL does not produce an optimal policy. See, however,
Table 5, which shows the gap between RL and the brute-force optimal solution.
The optimality gap shown in Table 5 is defined as
Table 1. Parameters for the cases studied and simulation results for Model X. Here, expo()
denotes an exponentially distributed random variable with a mean of 1/. Time between successive
interarrival material material Back-order Repair time RL switching
Table 2. Parameters for the cases studied and simulation results for Model Y. Legend: x is the level
of inventory at which the RL policy switches from core A to core B; y is the same at which it switches
from core B to unused. Time between successive core arrivals is expo(4).
mat. material Back-order Repair time Repair time RL switching
Case time (days) cost ($) cost ($) cost ($)
International Journal of Production Research
Table 4. Q-Factor values (Q(i, a)) for Case 1 of
Note: The values in bold are for the state where
Figure 11. Average cost associated with different switching points obtained by brute force
In the worst case, it is 10.9% and, in the best case, it is 1.4%. This provides sufficient
encouragement that RL can produce near-exact solutions for these switching problems,
and is likely to be useful where brute-force simulations are not possible because of problem
size (Models Y and Z). In the context of the optimality gap, we need to point out that
a change in the distributions of the repair time and the inter-arrival time for demands and
Table 5. Average costs ($ per day) for Model X.
between Core I Unused I Core II Unused II Back-order
arrivals II demands cost ($) cost ($) cost ($) cost ($)
cores can influence the optimality gap. However, our choice of these distributions is based
on the following assumptions. There is a great deal of variability in the time between
arrivals of cores and also demands, and hence the choice of the exponential distribution
is made. Repair times are also likely to be random variables, but the variance is likely to
be less. It was pointed out by a reviewer that the optimality gap could very well be
a function of the choice of the distributions for these random variables. Hence, in order for
a real-world manager to use these results, it is imperative that a thorough data-collection
exercise be carried out in the beginning to determine the distributions in an appropriate
manner. We must also point out that since the models we present are simulation-based,
changing distributions in the simulator is not difficult.
Table 3 displays the results of the RL simulation for Model Y. In Model Y, there are
two switching points: one from core A (cheaper core) to core B (costlier core), and the
second from core B to unused material. Finally, the results of the product-mix model
(Model Z) are displayed in Tables 6–8. Here, two different raw materials are required at
the assembly facility from the remanufacturing stream of raw materials. The RL switching
points for both parts are displayed in the results.
International Journal of Production Research
Table 7. Simulation inputs and results for Model Z.
Remanufacturing is a philosophy that is gaining in popularity in the production world.
It poses several new and exciting challenges to the production planner. As this philosophy
becomes more visible, it is likely that the importance of studying logistics problems
related to it will become more widely known. In this paper, we addressed an important
problem of raw-material selection in a remanufacturing facility. If remanufacturing,
which has tremendous environmental benefits, is to become economically viable, the
raw-material selection problem described here has to be solved in a near-optimal fashion.
This problem is complex and, as we have shown, it can be set up as a semi-Markov
decision problem, the transition probabilities of which are not easily available for
large-size real-world problems. Hence it cannot be solved easily via classical dynamic
programming. An alternative to dynamic programming is to use brute-force simulation,
which also is intractable for large-size problems. Hence, in this paper, we used a machine
learning approach, namely reinforcement learning, which uses concepts of approximate
dynamic programming within simulators, thereby bypassing the need for transition
probabilities. The main attraction of RL is that it can scale up well to large problems.
We demonstrate that, in general, the RL approach shows cost improvements over
a strategy that uses unused material only. We believe that this is the first use of RL for
A number of directions for future research can be envisaged. First, the problem studied
here could be expanded to a much larger setting where scores of machines and multiple
component types are involved. This will require a neural network to approximate the value
function. Another possibility is to develop robust heuristics to determine the switching
Bertsekas, D.P., 1995. Dynamic programming and optimal control. Belmont, MA: Athena, 2,
Bertsekas, D.P. and Tsitsikis, J., 1996. Neuro-dynamic programming. Belmont, MA: Athena, 1,
Bhattacharya, S., Guide, V.D.R., and van Wassenhove, L.N., 2006. Optimal order quantities
with remanufacturing across new product generations. Production and Operations Management,
Bradtke, S.J. and Duff, M., 1995. Reinforcement learning methods for continuous-time Markov
decision problems, Advances in neural information processing systems 7. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Ferrer, G. and Ketzenberg, M., 2004. Value of information in remanufacturing complex products.
Ferrer, G. and Whybark, D., 2001. Material planning for a remanufacturing facility. Production and
Geyer, R., van Wassenhove, L.N., and Atasu, A., 2007. The economics of remanufacturing under
limited component durability and finite product life cycles. Management Science, 53 (1),
Gosavi, A., 2003. Simulation-based optimization: parametric optimization techniques and
reinforcement learning. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Gosavi, A., 2007. Adaptive critics for airline revenue management, Proceedings of the 18th annual
conference of the production and operations management society. Dallas, TX.
Guide, V.D.R., et al., 2000. Supply-chain management for recoverable manufacturing systems.
Guide, V.D.R. and van Wassenhove, L.N., 2001. Managing product returns for remanufacturing.
Production and Operations Management, 10 (2), 142–155.
Hoshino, T., Yura, K., and Hitomi, K., 1995. Optimization analysis for recycle-oriented
manufacturing. International Journal of Production Research, 33 (8), 2069–2078.
Kongar, E. and Gupta, S., 2002. A goal programming approach to the remanufacturing supply
chain model. Proceedings of the SPIE international conference on environmentally conscious
Konstantarasa, I. and Papachristos, S., 2007. Optimal policy and holding cost stability regions in
a periodic review inventory system with manufacturing and remanufacturing options.
European Journal of Operational Research, 178 (2), 433–438.
Lund, R.T. and Bollinger, L., 1981. Remanufacturing survey findings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center
for Policy Alternatives, Technical report.
RIT Website, 2006. http://www.reman.rit.edu.
Savaskan, R.C., Bhattacharya, S., and Van Wassenhove, L.N., 2004. Closed loop supply chain
models with product remanufacturing. Management Science, 50 (2), 239–252.
Sutton, R. and Barto, A.G., 1998. Reinforcement learning: an introduction. Cambridge, MA: The
International Journal of Production Research
van der Laan, E., et al., 1996. An (s, q) inventory model with remanufacturing and disposal.
International Journal of Production Economics, 46 (1), 339–350.
van der Laan, E. and Teunter, R., 2004. Simple heuristics for pull and push remanufacturing policies.
Rotterdam, Netherlands: Erasmus University Rotterdam, Econometric Institute Report.
Watkins, C.J., Learning from delayed rewards, Thesis. Cambridge: Kings College.
Zhou, L., et al., 2006. Dynamic performance of a hybrid inventory system with a Kanban policy in
remanufacturing process. Omega, 34 (6), 585–598.
Zikopoulos, C. and Tagaras, G., 2008. On the attractiveness of sorting before disassembly in
remanufacturing. IIE Transactions, 40 (3), 313–323.
Copyright of International Journal of Production Research is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
