Setting planned lead times for a make-to-order production
CHEE-CHONG TEO1,2,∗ , ROHIT BHATNAGAR1,3 and STEPHEN C. GRAVES1,4
Singapore-MIT Alliance, 2 School of Civil & Environmental Engineering and 3 Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological
University, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
Received February 2009 and accepted July 2010
This article considers a make-to-order manufacturing environment with fixed guaranteed delivery lead times and multiple product
families, each with a stochastic demand process. The primary challenge in this environment is how to meet the quoted delivery times
subject to fluctuating workload and capacity limits. The tactical planning parameters are considered, namely, the planning windows
and planned lead times. The planning process that is modeled is the one in which the demand represents a dynamic input into
the master production schedule. A planning window for each product family controls how the schedule of each product family is
translated into a job release. It can be thought of as the slack that exists when the fixed quoted delivery lead time is longer than the
total planned production lead time. Furthermore, the planned lead time of each station regulates the workflow within a multi-station
shop. The model has underlying discrete time periods to allow the modeling of the planning process that is typically defined in time
buckets; within each time period, the intra-period workflow that permits multiple job movements within the time period is modeled.
The presented model characterizes key performance measures for the shop as functions of the planning windows and planned lead
times. An optimization model is formulated that is able to determine the values of these planning parameters that minimize the
[Supplementary materials are available for this article. Go to the publisher’s online edition of IIE Transactions for additional results
of the simulation study in Section 6 of this manuscript.]
Keywords: Make-to-order, production smoothing, master production schedule, material requirements planning, planned lead time,
Managing customer lead times in the face of demand uncertainty is a critical challenge faced by Make-To-Order
(MTO) firms that, unlike make-to-stock firms, cannot use
finished goods inventory to buffer against demand variations. Some firms continually adjust the delivery times
quoted to customers depending on capacity load; others
quote fixed (or a tight range of) lead times to their customers, while varying the production rate in response to
demand fluctuations. The fixed quoted delivery time represents a lead time guarantee to customers that the manufacturer strives to meet with high likelihood. Rao et al.
(2005, p. 400) highlight that the fixed lead time strategy
enables the firm “to set clear expectations to customers,”
and thereby improves customer satisfaction. For example,
Toyota’s mass-customized Camry Solaras cars have a 5-day
delivery lead time after they are ordered by dealers (Robinson, 1999). Weng (1999) reports an industrial application in
an MTO lighting fixture manufacturer wherein the use of a
10-day fixed lead time policy significantly improved the ontime performance of deliveries. The fixed lead time strategy
has been utilized in industries where lead times are largely
dictated by the market and when predictability is valued
by customers; e.g., customized printed circuit boards, for
which customers need to coordinate the concurrent availability of components to build an assembly.
If the MTO manufacturer adopts a fixed lead time strategy, it has to first set the fixed lead time, which involves
complex trade-offs encompassing decisions at the strategic
and tactical level. The manufacturer must consider its market position in terms of its pricing, competitors’ lead times,
and market requirements as well as its own production
capability in meeting the lead time. The setting of the fixed
quoted delivery lead time is a cross-functional decision,
involving marketing, sales, and production departments.
After determining the fixed lead time, the manufacturer
must make tactical and operational decisions on how best
to meet this guaranteed fixed lead time. In this article we
assume that the firm has adopted a fixed lead time strategy
and has set the delivery lead time, and we focus herein on
the tactical production decisions needed to support such
a strategy. To meet the fixed lead time, the MTO manufacturer must be able to flex its production capability.
For instance, the manufacturer might utilize overtime or
subcontracting in periods of high demand; alternatively, it
might plan to operate at a lower capacity utilization level
so as to have regular-time capacity available to meet high
demand. In either case there is a cost for this flexibility,
due to underutilized capacity or premium production costs
Typically, the two core functions at the tactical level
needed to support a fixed lead time policy are the Material Requirements Planning (MRP) and Master Production
Scheduling (MPS). We consider the two sets of planning parameters that have the most influence on regulating the flow
of work in such an environment, namely, the planned lead
times in the MRP and the planning window in the MPS.
The Planned Lead Time (PLT) is a key input for MRP and
is used to project how long each job will spend in each production step or workstation. There is a trade-off involved
in setting the PLT; a short PLT leads to a more variable
workload at the workstation, while a long PLT results in
more Work-In-Process (WIP) at the station.
The planning window is the difference between the
quoted delivery lead time and the total planned production lead time for a job. We assume the MPS is smoothed
over the planning window (if a slack exists) while preserving
the integrity of the fixed quoted delivery lead time. There is
prior evidence that regulating the release of work to a shop
provides benefits. A longer planning window allows greater
smoothing of the MPS, which leads to a less variable job
release into the shop and subsequently fewer occurrences
of “spikes” in capacity loading. The idea is to avoid releasing surges of customer orders that would otherwise cause
capacity saturation with no significant increase in throughput. In addition, Vollmann et al. (2005, p. 321) highlight
the growing importance of production smoothing in nonrepetitive and MTO production, as firms increasingly need
to respond to customer pressure for greater flexibility in
volume and product mix. It is also well documented in
the just-in-time literature that a stable MPS facilitates process and quality improvements. Without a stable production environment, resources tend to be channeled to react
to changes in production output instead of achieving process improvements. Furthermore, a smoothed MPS leads to
more stable requirements for raw materials or components,
which results in lower component safety stock and/or a
more stable delivery schedule for suppliers.
The key challenge in developing the model is how to
incorporate both the planning system decisions and the
workflow control decisions for a production network. On
the one hand, most MPS and MRP systems use time buckets of equal intervals (e.g., a day, a week, or a work shift)
as the underlying time unit for the key manufacturing decisions; the planned production output, inventory levels, and
job releases are specified for each time bucket in the planning horizon. On the other hand, job flow occurs at much
shorter time intervals (essentially in continuous time) and it
is important to capture the dynamics of these intra-period
job movements. The problem is further complicated by the
presence of multiple products in the context of MTO manufacturing, where we need to capture the planning decisions
and job routings of each individual product.
To connect the discrete-time planning system and the
intra-period job flows, we extend the Tactical Planning
Model (TPM) of Graves (1986). The TPM is a discretetime model in which all transitions within the model are
governed by an underlying time period. The model assumes
that all job movements from one station to another occur
only at the start of each time period, which corresponds to
the planning time bucket in the context of this article. This
assumption is restrictive in many situations where jobs can
make multiple moves between stations within a single time
bucket. We address this limitation and extend the model
by allowing work to flow between workstations throughout each period and not only at the start of the period.
To our knowledge, work on intra-period job movement
in multi-station systems has not been previously reported
in the literature. Due to the structure of the TPM-based
workflow model, the workflow of each product family can
be modeled individually. Hence, the TPM extension is able
to capture the key planning and workflow attributes of
each product family, including the demand process, release
planning, job routing, planning windows, and PLT at each
We model how the stochastic demand process is translated into the MPS, where its smoothness is controlled with
the length of the planning window. We then model the
workflow in a multi-station production network, in which
the MPS determines the job release and the PLTs control
the production at each station. In this fashion, we model the
linkage between the MPS planning process and the workflow in the production network. Our model determines the
variance of production requirements (a measure of capacity
requirements) and the expected WIP level at each workstation. This allows us to characterize the trade-off between
the capacity requirements and WIP inventory as it depends
on the planning windows and the PLTs. We embed the
model in an optimization model to determine the PLTs
In the next section, we review related work. In Section
3, we describe the problem setting and explain the roles of
the planning window and PLT in production smoothing. In
Section 4, we develop the model that permits multiple job
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
movements in each discrete-time bucket and subsequently
develop a workflow model for a single-product family. We
then discuss how we can extend the model to characterize
the production of multi-product families in Section 5. In
Section 6, we discuss the results of a simulation study to
validate the model. In Section 7, we formulate an optimization model to set the planning windows and PLTs. Section
8 presents an example that illustrates how the model can
be used to support tactical planning of a MTO production system. We conclude in Section 9 with a discussion of
Much of the literature on managing customer lead times in
MTO manufacturing is on due date management. Earlier
work encompasses setting of due dates and sequencing of
orders (see surveys in Cheng and Gupta (1980) and Baker
(1984)). The trade-off in this problem is that tight due dates
reflect better responsiveness to customer demand but may
be difficult or costly to achieve due to conflicts with sequencing objectives. Subsequent work includes the additional consideration of order acceptance decisions; i.e., the
effect of quoted due date toward customer orders. More
recent work considers the additional dimension of how
pricing affects customer demand, often together with order
acceptance decisions. The reader is referred to the review
by Keskinocak and Tayur (2004) for details of the various
aspects of the due date management policies.
The literature on due date setting focuses on a singlestage aggregated system, for which the firm has some flexibility to vary the quoted delivery lead time. Our research
differs in that we consider the production planning aspects
of how best to satisfy a fixed quoted delivery lead time
for a multi-stage, multi-product system. The due date setting models support real-time operational decisions for the
variable lead time strategy. In contrast, our model is not
intended for real-time decisions. Rather, we focus on the
production-related tactics of setting the internal lead times
in order to support the fixed lead time strategy.
There is a limited amount of research that deals with
MTO manufacturers who quote a fixed delivery lead time.
Cruickshanks et al. (1984) consider production smoothing
in a single-stage manufacturing process and introduce the
concept of the planning window. We also utilize the concept of the planning window to smooth the MPS; however,
in addition, we model production smoothing over a multistage production network. So and Song (1998) consider a
single-product, single-stage queueing system with a fixed
quoted delivery lead time. They characterize the lead time,
price, and capacity expansion decisions with the objective
to maximize profits subject to a service constraint. Rao
et al. (2005) also consider a single-stage problem with a
fixed quoted delivery lead time with similar decision variables (except that it excludes capacity decisions). Rather
than a service constraint, their model assumes a completely
reliable delivery lead time achieved by outsourcing in times
of capacity shortfall. Our model is similar to theirs in that
we also assume the delivery lead time is always met through
subcontracting or overtime, if necessary. Both So and Song
(1998) and Rao et al. (2005) focus on the strategic decision
of determining the fixed delivery lead time to maximize
profits for a single-stage system that produces an aggregate product. In contrast, our model addresses the tactical decisions associated with MPS and setting the release
process and workflow control policies in a multi-station,
Another related research area encompasses analytical models that determine the optimal PLTs. Weeks
(1978), Kanet (1986), Matsuura and Tsubone (1993), and
Matsuura et al. (1996) develop single-stage models, whereas
Yano (1987) and Gong et al. (1994) formulate serial multiechelon models. Our article differs in that we model a general network of workstations with no restriction on process
routes by focusing on tactical planning rather than detailed
scheduling, from which we achieve considerable tractability.
The prior work assumes an exogenous job arrival process,
but we determine work releases that are generated from the
demand process and explicitly model how the discrete-time
planning process affects workflow and behavior of individual workstations. For a job shop, Graves (1986) presents
the TPM that highlights the trade-off between production
smoothness and WIP in selecting the PLT at each workstation. Other work that is related to the TPM includes Graves
(1988a, 1988b, 1988c), Fine and Graves (1989), Graves et al.
(1998), Graves and Hollywood (2001), Hollywood (2005),
Teo (2006), and Teo et al. (2009). In this article, we extend
the TPM in a number of ways. First, we explicitly model
the release process for a multi-product MTO environment.
Second, we model the dynamics of job flows within each
time bucket, allowing us to characterize how the planning
process affects workflow. Third, we use the model to formulate an optimization model to support the setting of
Our extension of the TPM is an effort to address the gap
between discrete-time planning models and continuoustime workflow models; Karmarkar (1993, p. 320) states,
“There is a need for an approach that will work at the planning level, so that facility loading under seasonal demand
can be analyzed. The technical problem here is that planning models tend to be in discrete time while queuing and
scheduling models are in continuous time.”
Planning models involve dividing the planning horizon
into discrete time periods that correspond to the time buckets; the models determine the optimal production quantities and capacity plans in each bucket that satisfy aggregate
resource constraints. However, to characterize the specific
shop workflow and capacity loading requires the capturing
of the intra-period processing and movement of jobs.
Work on clearing functions (see, for example,
Karmarkar (1989), Asmundsson et al., (2006), and Selcuk
et al. 2008) is similar in intent to our TPM extension, since
this work also attempts to connect discrete-time planning
with continuous-time shop behavior. A non-linear clearing
function approximates the queue congestion due to capacity loading by specifying the amount of work “cleared” in a
given time period by a resource as a non-linear function of
WIP; the function is embedded in optimization models for
aggregate production planning. Our model also assumes
a WIP-dependent production output (as will be seen) but
differs in that the production output in each time period is
to preserve the integrity of PLTs. Furthermore, our intent
is more to determine the planning tactics (i.e., the PLTs and
planning windows) rather than detailed production plans.
to complete production of each order exactly a week after
the receipt of the order. Each workstation is assigned a station PLT for each product family, denoted as n i k. It is the
intended amount of time required for each job from product family k to complete its processing at the workstation,
including both processing and waiting time. We associate a
product PLT PPLTk with each product family, which is the
total planned time required for an item of product family
k to be completed by the shop. Each product family has
predetermined distinct routings that define the sequence of
workstations that a product must visit for processing; we
permit re-entry in which a routing can re-visit any workstation. If the product family k has a single routing, PPLTk is
the planned time required for a job from product family k
to move through the route, which we express as
We begin with a summary of notations in Table 1.
We consider an MTO production system that produces
a variety of products. We assume that end items can be
grouped into product families that consist of products with
similar designs and production processes. We define the
MPS at the product family level (see Vollmann et al. (2005)
for defining a group of end items as the MPS unit). Each
product family k has a fixed quoted delivery lead time, denoted as DLTk ; for instance, if a product family has a fixed
DLTk of (say) a week, then the manufacturer would commit
where ωi k is the number of times each job from product
family k visits workstation i . A product family may have
multiple routings; e.g., if the end item requires assembly of
multiple parts. In this case, each routing indexed by r (k)
has to satisfy Equation (1) and, in addition, ωi,r (k) replaces
ωi k, which denotes the number of times each job in routing
Index for time period (i.e., planning time bucket)
Index for workstations, i = 1, 2, . . . , m (i = 0 represents the dummy station)
Index for sub-period at workstation i , si = 1, 2, . . . , pi
Length of each sub-period si at workstation i (i = 1/ pi )
Fixed quoted delivery lead time for product family k
Product planned lead time for product family k
Length of planning window for product family k
Penalty cost per hour of capacity shortfall at workstation i
Unit WIP inventory holding cost at workstation i for product family k
Station planned lead time at workstation i for product family k
Number of times each job from product family k visits worstation i
Average amount of work input to station i generated by a unit of output at station j
Production requirements (in workhours) at workstation i in period t
Nominal capacity at workstation i (in workhours) per period t
Queue length (in workhours) for product family k at workstation i at start of period t
Amount of workload that arrives at workstation i in period t
Zero-mean noise term at workstation i in period t
Production requirement (in workhours) at workstation i in sub-period si of length i
Queue length (in workhours) at start of sub-period si of length i
Column vector {P0t , P1t , . . . , Pmt }
Column vector {Q0t , Q1t , . . . , Qmt }
Column vector {A0t , A1t , . . . , Amt }
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
Fig. 1. Relationship between DLTk , PPLTk , and Wk .
The MPS can be smoothed over the planning window. The
relationship between DLTk, PPLTk , and Wk is illustrated
Jobs to be completed in period t + PPLTk need to be
released in period t. In any period t, to determine the release
quantity, the production level to be completed in t + PPLTk
is set with knowledge of all contracted orders for delivery
over the planning window encompassing period t + PPLTk
to t + DLTk. We express the length of the planning window
We assume the production over the planning window is
leveled, where a larger Wk allows a greater extent of smoothing. We illustrate the MPS smoothing with an example in
the Appendix. We note that if DLTk = PPLTk , then Wk =
1: this corresponds to no smoothing as the releases in each
period t must correspond exactly to the orders due in time
The smoothing of the MPS results in early production
(and release) of some orders. We do not explicitly consider
the inventory of finished products that result from the orders that are built ahead of time. There is very little risk in
holding this inventory, as it has been made to order. Furthermore, orders that are built in advance can be delivered
to customers who accept early deliveries. Alternatively, the
built-ahead inventory might be shipped by a more economical mode given the additional time for shipping before the
due date. In both cases, there is an opportunity to provide
additional value to the customer. Therefore, we argue that
the finished goods inventory level is not a crucial planning
The workload at each workstation varies over time due to
both varying job arrivals and inherent production variability. Sources of the inherent production variability include
dissimilar processing requirements of jobs, machine breakdowns, setups, and yields. In face of the workload variability, a larger n i k allows smoother production (as will be
seen) and a higher likelihood for the workstation to meet
the station PLT. However, with a larger n i k, jobs stay longer
at the workstation, which leads to a higher WIP inventory.
We let Pi t be the production requirement in workhours
at workstation i in time period t. We define production requirement Pi t as the production output required at workstation i in period t in order to ensure that the work-in-queue
satisfies the station PLTs. The motivation for this specification is to model current planning practice. In MRP systems,
the MPS for end items, after offsetting for the station PLTs,
is translated into production requirements at each workstation. To achieve coordination of production with scheduled
receipts of both produced and procured components, the
station PLT is used to determine job start times at each
workstation using the well known backward scheduling
We assume that the production requirements at each
workstation are controlled by its station PLTs. Specifically,
the production schedule is regulated by the job start times
whereby a job is not required to be produced earlier even
if capacity is available. Effectively, each workstation produces a quantity sufficient to fulfill the station’s PLT of
each product family in each period. We do not consider the
procured components in our model and assume the scheduled receipts of purchased components are always reliable.
Finally, we like to stress that our intent is to capture the
tactical level issues; i.e., how best to set the internal lead
times to meet the fixed quoted delivery lead time in normal
operating circumstances. Thus, we do not take into account
the actual detailed operational decisions that might deviate
from the tactics deployed in the model; e.g., expediting of
a particular order from an important customer.
There are several planning decisions to make in the MTO
1. For each product family, given the fixed DLTk and the
constraint PPLTk ≤ DLTk, how does one assign n i k to
each workstation? This decision must account for the
trade-off between capacity requirements in the face of
variable workload and WIP level at each workstation.
2. The planner must consider the trade-off between the
smoothing of the MPS and the time allowed at the workstations. Increasing the PPLTk means a longer n i k for
job completion at the workstations; however, a longer
PPLTk results in a shorter planning window, yielding
a more variable job release pattern over time and thus
greater variability in job arrivals to the workstations. A
larger PPLTk also leads to a longer time spent at the
workstations, and thus higher WIP levels.
3. The planner must consider the interdependence of workflow between the workstations. In addition, each station
can process jobs from multiple product families and the
production planner must take into account the interactions between the various product families.
Our model helps the planner in setting n i k for each workstation, which determines the PPLTk and Wk. In considering the trade-off between capacity requirements and WIP
levels, we consider the sum of expected total penalty cost
due to capacity shortfall and expected WIP inventory holding cost.
We let ci be the penalty cost per workhour of capacity
shortfall for workstation i ; h i k be the unit WIP inventory
holding cost (per workhour per period) at workstation i
for product family k; Mi be the nominal capacity for workstation i in workhours per period; and Qi kt be the queue
length in workhours for product family k at station i at
where x+ = max(x, 0). The term ci E[Pi t –Mi ]+ denotes the
expected penalty cost incurred due to capacity shortfall;
i.e., if Pi t > Mi . A higher variability of Pi t leads to a higher
expected penalty cost and its variability is influenced by
PPLTk , n i k and Wk, as described earlier.
We interpret the expected penalty cost as follows. We
assume that each workstation can always output the production requirement; that is, there are no rigid capacity
constraints but there is a nominal capacity limit Mi . When
Pi t exceeds Mi , we assume that the workstation is able to
accomplish the production requirement but that it incurs
an additional cost ci per hour for all production in excess of
the nominal capacity. For instance, we might assume that
in times of high workload, a workstation takes expediting actions, e.g., overtime and subcontracting, to produce
the jobs within the stations’s PLT. The workstation would
then incur an expediting cost ci (Pi t –Mi ) for its production
that is beyond its nominal capacity. (Our use of convex
cost functions in modeling production systems in similar
to Holt et al. (1960), which is one of the earliest works that
The key to this research is to characterize Pi t to enable
us to compute the expected penalty cost. In essence, we determine the first two moments of Pi t wherein the variance
of Pi t represents a measure of variability of the production requirements. By further assuming Pi t is normally distributed, we are able to compute the expected penalty cost.
In addition, we determine the expected WIP level E[Qi t ].
This allows us to develop an expression for Equation (3)
that we use as an objective function in an optimization
model to support the setting of Wk and n i k.
In this section, we develop the characterization of Pi t for a
single aggregate product family. We first extend the TPM
of Graves (1986) to allow multiple work movements within
a time period to characterize the intra-period transfer of
production requirements. We then present how we convert
the stochastic demand for a single-family into a smoother
MPS and release. Next we model the workflow in a general
network of workstations. (In Section 5, we build upon this
single-family model to incorporate multiple families.)
4.1. Multiple job movements in a discrete time bucket
Since we are modeling a single product family, we drop the
subscript k for notational convenience. We start with the
discrete time period t with length of one time unit, corresponding to that for the planning time bucket (e.g., a day or
a week). We sub-divide each period t into pi equal subintervals and use index si , where si = 1, 2, . . . , pi , to denote
the sub-periods at workstation i . We define the length of
We assume that work arrives at the start of each subperiod and the workflow is measured in units of work content at a station (e.g., hours) rather than jobs. We assume
that the production requirement at workstation i in subperiod si of length i , denoted by Y(i , si ), is a linear
function of its queue length at the start of sub-period si ,
Y(i , si ) = (i /n i )X(i , si ) for si = 1, 2, . . . , pi , (4)
where n i ≥ i . Equation (4) is similar to the linear control
rule of the TPM in Graves (1986) but differs in that Equation (4) is expressed as a function of the size of the time grid;
as such, we allow arrivals to the workstation throughout
We interpret Equation (4) as follows: in order to realize
the station’s PLT, the workstation i must not allow work to
wait for more than n i periods and thus we approximate that
it must process close to (i /n i ) of the work-in-queue in each
sub-period. We note that the production requirements vary
according to the work-in-queue to ensure that the actual
lead time for nearly all of jobs in the queue matches the station’s PLT. Furthermore, when a relatively high workload
arrives to join the queue, the workload would be “spread”
over the station’s PLT. Thus, a larger n i k permits a relatively smoother production requirement as it permits more
workload leveling. (Note that the production–workload relationship in Equation (4) aligns with empirical findings in
labor psychology that show that productivity, and thus production rate, in some human-operated production systems
increases with workload because of the effect of work pressure on human performance; see Bertrand and Van Ooijen
We further assume that the arrival of work to the workstation in period t, which we denote as Ai t , occurs uniformly over period t. In particular, we assume that the
arrival amount at the start of each sub-period is equal to
Ai t / pi . The validity of this assumption depends upon the
characteristics of the arrival stream as well as the length of
the time period. If the arrival stream is highly varying and
consists of only a few arrivals in each period, then this
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
assumption may be less reasonable. Similarly, this
assumption will be more valid if the time period is long
compared to the inter-arrival times, as this will result in
a more even spread of the workload within each period.
Nevertheless, although we recognize that the variability of
inter-arrival times affects the expected queuing time, we
note that the purpose of our model is for tactical planning; therefore, we are more concerned with the aggregate
random arrivals Ai t in each time bucket, rather than the
detailed random variations within the time period.
We define Qi t as the queue length at the start of period
t prior to any arrival. We have the boundary condition for
the queue length at the first sub-period within each time
For si = 2, . . . , pi , we model the queue length at the start
of sub-period si by the balance equation:
X(i , si ) = X(i , si − 1) − Y(i , si − 1) + Ai t / pi .
By substituting Equation (4) into Equation (6), we obtain
X(i , si ) = (1 − (i /n i ))X(i , si − 1) + Ai t / pi .
We express Pi t as the sum of the production requirements
We use Equations (5) and (7) to find that:
X(i , si ) = Qi t + Ai t − [1 − (i /n i )]X(i , pi ).
We now substitute Equation (9) into Equation (8) to get
Pi t = Qi t + Ai t − [1 − (i /n i )] X(i , pi ).
From Equation (10), in order to get an expression for Pi t ,
we need to find X(i , pi ). From Equation (7) and repeated
Therefore, the production in each time period is a linear
function of both the work-in-queue at the start of the period
and the arrivals during the period. The coefficients for the
linear function depend on the size of the subintervals.
By letting the length of the sub-period go to zero, we
obtain the continuous-time limits for β i (i ) and γ i (i ). In
effect, we assume that Equation (4) holds at every instant
in time, which corresponds to a fluid-like workflow. Since
i = 1/ pi by definition, we obtain the continuous-time
We can now restate Equation (12) for the continuoustime function as
where β i and γ i are given above. The validity of the fluid
flow assumption yielding Equation (13) depends on the
frequency of job movements in each time bucket; a higher
frequency would suggest a more fluid workflow. However,
in situations where job flow rates are low, we expect the
sub-period coefficients β i (i ) and γ i (i ) to be more appropriate. In such cases, i is set to a value on the order of
the average inter-arrival time. For notational consistency,
we will use βi and γi for the subsequent model development.
The balance equation for workstation i at the start of
We substitute Equation (13) into Equation (14) and perform repeated substitution to obtain:
We can use Equation (11) to re-write Equation (10) as
If the arrival stream {Ai t } to the workstation were independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with variance
σ 2 , then we find the variance of production requirements
(The arrival stream to a station from upstream stations is generally not i.i.d. but correlated over time. We
X(i , pi ) = [1 − (i /n i )] pi −1 × Qi t + (1 + [1 − (i /n i )]
Fig. 2. σ (Pi t ) computed for different sub-period lengths (with σ = 1).
consider correlated arrivals in Section 4.3.) In Fig. 2 we
compare the standard deviation of Pi t , denoted by σ (Pi t ),
obtained using the continuous-time coefficients βi and γi
with that computed with the sub-period coefficients β i (i )
We observe that the results are close over a reasonable
range of flow rates; at i = 0.1 and i = 0.05 (i.e., corresponding to 10 and 20 arrivals per period, respectively),
the percentage differences are 2.6% and 1.2% respectively.
Thus, we expect Equation (13) to be a reasonable approximation. In Section 6, we discuss the suitability of the coefficients for different job flow rates based on a simulation
We have expressed Equation (13) in terms of the parameters βi and γi , both of which are functions of n i .
To see how Equation (13) behaves for different values of
n i , we graph Var (Pi t ), βi , and γi as functions of n i in
Fig. 3. We observe that Var (Pi t ) decreases with larger values of n i ; i.e., a longer station PLT leads to a smoother
We denote the demand in period t by Dt and assume that
the demand process is i.i.d. over time with mean E[Dt ]. As
discussed in Section 3.1, the production planner smoothes
the MPS by considering the orders not yet released into
production as a demand queue, waiting to be released into
To model the work release, we introduce a dummy workstation that is the first station that a job “visits” before it is
released to the shop. The queue at the dummy station represents the order backlog of work waiting to be released. In
each period, the job arrival to the dummy station is the demand Dt and the production output of the dummy station
corresponds to the job release in that period. Denoting station 0 as the dummy station, we model the MPS smoothing
Fig. 3. Var(Pi t ), β i , and γ i as functions of n i (with σ = 1).
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
where W  1. Equation (17) is equivalent to Equation (4)
and the linear control rule of the TPM. In Equation (17),
we assume that in order to ensure an order in the input
queue does not wait for more than W periods, the shop
attempts to release 1/W of the on-hand orders in each
period. Furthermore, Equation (17) models the smoothing
of the release by spreading the on-hand orders evenly over
The material balance equation for the dummy station is
By substituting Equation (17) into Equation (18) to replace Q0t in Equation (18), we obtain:
namely, a first-order exponential smoothing model with
1/W as the smoothing parameter. A larger value of W
results in a smoother job release into the shop.
We model the work arrivals to workstation i by
where φi j is a positive scalar. We assume that each time unit
of production requirement at workstation j generates φi j
time units of input to station i on average. When station j
represents the dummy station, we assume that each order
unit triggers φi j time units of work, on average, for station
i . We note that φ0 j = 0 for all j and that φ j 0 is the average
amount of work that starts at workstation j for each new
To analyze the workflow model, we combine the production functions in Equations (13) and (17) and express the
where  is a square matrix with elements φi j . By substituting Equation (21) into (20), we obtain:
where I is an identity matrix. Note that F−1 exists since it is a
diagonal matrix, with each diagonal element being positive.
The term ζ t is a column random vector that combines
both demand arrivals to the dummy station and the noise
arrivals to the workstations; it has Dt−1 in the first row and
{ξ1t , . . . , ξmt } in the next m rows. The term ξi t is a zeromean noise term that represents any inherent production
variability in the arrival stream to station i . The noise signifies any deviation between actual and expected workload,
based on the upstream production levels. We assume that
the amount of noise is independent of the work arrivals.
We can use ξi t to model the sources of variability due to
machine failures, setups, production yields, or any dissimilarity in processing requirements within the product family.
Here we adopt the concept of effective processing time. The
effective processing time is the adjusted processing time that
incorporates the variability of processing requirements as
well as the time that is unavailable for processing due to
random events. See Hopp and Spearman (2000) for a more
Now by substituting Equations (21) and (22) into Equation (23), we have that:
where H = (I − G)−1 F and B = I − H(I − ). We can
show that the matrix (I − G) is invertible as long as the
spectral radius of  is less than one, which is a necessary
condition for the system to reach steady state, as will be
seen. Assuming an infinite history for the system, we obtain by repeated iteration:
where Pt = {P0t , P1t , . . . , Pmt } , Qt = {Q0t , Q1t , . . . , Qmt } ,
and At = {A0t , A1t , . . . , Amt } are column vectors and m is
the number of workstations. F is a diagonal matrix with first
diagonal element equal to 1/W and the remaining diagonal
elements set to βi (i = 1, 2, . . . , m). G is a diagonal matrix
with zero as the top element and γi (i = 1, 2, . . . , m) as the
We express the work arrivals to the workstations given
We combine the balance equations for the workstations in
Equation (14) and for the dummy stations in Equation (18)
We denote the expectation of vector ζt by the vector µ, a
column vector with E[Dt ] in the first row as the only nonzero element, since by definition, the noise terms {ξi t } have
zero mean. From Equation (25), we obtain the expectation
Note that E [P] does not depend on the planning parameters but depends only on the workflow matrix  and the
vector µ. The variance of the production vector is given by
where Var(ζt ) is a covariance matrix that consists of the
variance of Dt and the covariances of the noise terms
ξi t . We note that Equation (27) provides the production
variances for each station as well as the covariance for
each pair of workstations. These covariances are useful for
understanding the interdependence among workloads at
We can compute the power series in Equation (27) using the methods in Graves (1986). We show in Teo (2006)
that the series in Equation (24) converges if and only if the
spectral radius of  is less than one. This condition ensures
that a unit of work processed at one station cannot eventually generate more than one unit of work for the same
workstation; otherwise, the system will not reach a steady
Now we compute the expected queue length at each station from Equation (22):
E[Q] = F−1 (I − G)E [P] = F−1 (I − G) (I − )−1 µ
The above results require independence between the demands of the product families. We can relax this assumption to incorporate correlated demands by building a single
linear-systems model in which the first k terms of the noise
vector ζkt correspond to the demand processes for the k
product families. We can then incorporate the demand correlations into the covariance matrix for the noise vector ζkt .
The single-family model assumes a single workflow matrix
 and assumes a single PLT for each workstation. To apply
the model to a multi-product setting, each station has to
have a common station PLT across all product families
and all product families have same workflow and routing
through the shop. In this section we show how to relax
these restrictions and extend the single-family model for
We consider a manufacturing system with multiple product families and where each workstation processes jobs
from one or more families. We assume that each workstation i has a PLT of n i k for each product family that
visits the workstation. Furthermore, each product family
is allowed to have its own DLTk , PPLTk , and planning
We first analyze the production for each individual product family. We model each product family as in the singlefamily model; i.e., each product family k has a dummy
station and has column vector ζkt and matrix k to model
each family’s demand, noise levels, and routing. Furthermore, each product family has to satisfy Equations (1) and
(2) for the DLTk, PPLTk , and planning window Wk of each
product family. We use the single-family model to characterize the production requirements and queue lengths for
product family k; i.e., E[Pk], Var(Pk), and E[Qk].
Similar to the single-family model, we assume an infinite capacity (albeit with a finite nominal capacity Mi ) at
each workstation. Hence each workstation can always meet
the production requirements for all product families processed at that station. By further assuming that demand
is independent between the product families, we obtain
the mean and variance of the total production requirements and the total queue lengths by aggregating across all
We perform a simulation study to test the accuracy of
Equation (27). Specifically, we aim to validate the following
workflow assumptions in deriving Equation (27).
1. We permit the production requirements to vary within
each period according to Equation (4); thus, if jobs move
instantly downstream upon completion, the arrival process to the downstream stations will also vary, which
contradicts the uniform-arrival assumption.
2. We model flow of discrete jobs but assume workflow is
measured in units of work content (e.g., hours).
3. In deriving the continuous-time coefficients βi and γi ,
we assume that each job flows continuously like a fluid
and that the production output satisfies Equation (4)
at every instant of time. We assume that the sub-period
coefficients β i (i ) and γ i (i ) can depict job flow of
We simulate a six-station serial flow system with a stationary work input at the first station. Processing times
are fixed and equal at all stations. The motive for such a
simplified simulation model is to attain a controlled experiment and to test whether the accuracy of Equation (27)
deteriorates for the downstream workstations. In the simulation model, discrete jobs are processed and jobs move
immediately to the next station upon completion, instead
of flowing downstream uniformly over each time period as
assumed in the model. For the work input with mean of
80 workhours and standard deviation of 20 workhours, we
experiment with different processing times (1, 2, 4, 8, and
16 hours) to vary the fluidity of workflow; the longer the
processing time, the less fluid (i.e., more lumpy) the workflow. In addition, we assume the station PLTs are equal for
all stations, and we experiment with different values (1, 2,
and 3 periods). Note that the utilization levels are not an
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
experimental factor because we assume flexible capacity. A
more detailed discussion of the simulation setup and results
The results are encouraging as the study shows that
Equation (27) computed using β i and γ i is reasonably accurate for a wide range of job fluidity. The average percentage error in the standard deviation of Pi t for processing
times of 1, 2, 4, and 8 hours is 2.3% and the maximum
error is 6.5%. As expected, the errors computed for the
less fluid 16-hour jobs using β i and γ i are relatively higher,
with the largest percentage error at 17.6%. The sub-period
coefficients β i (i ) and γ i (i ) yield a reasonably accurate
approximation for the 16-hour jobs with a percentage error of 2%. We observe no obvious trends in percentage
errors between the different stations and the station PLTs.
We also test the model’s robustness to production variability by experimenting with different standard deviations of
processing times, namely, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 hour for a
mean processing time of 4 hours. The average percentage
The simulation model consists of a serial flow system
that processes a single-product family. We offer a few comments to how we can extend the simulation results to
the multi-family, general network setting. Since the multifamily model involves modeling each product family independently using family-specific parameters, the validity
of the multi-family model depends on the model for each
individual product family. Therefore, we focus our attention on the generalized routing of a single product family,
wherein each workstation can receive a job stream from
multiple stations and its output can be dispatched to more
than one workstation. One limitation arises if the arrival
streams at a workstation (of the same product family) are
of vastly different levels of fluidity. For instance, a workstation receives two arrival streams, one with lumpy jobs at
low frequencies and the other with high fluidity; as such,
there is no appropriate set of coefficients that is able to
match the fluidity of both streams. We note that this limitation does not occur if the arrival streams are of suitably
high fluidity, in which case the coefficients βi and γi would
match both streams. We expect this could be a probable
scenario because as stated earlier, βi and γi give accurate
computations for a reasonably wide range of job fluidity.
Likewise, if the streams are from different product families,
the limitation will not happen because a family-specific set
of coefficients can be employed to match the fluidity of each
We formulate a non-linear optimization program for the
multi-family model. Our objective is to minimize the total
expected expediting cost plus total WIP inventory holding
cost. The decision variables are Wk and n i k. We assume the
delivery lead time DLTk is exogenously determined for each
ωi,r (k) n i k + Wk − 1 = DLTk, ∀k, r (k),
The objective function is the total expected cost in Equation (3), wherein Pi t is a function of both Wk and n i k, and
Qi kt is a function of n i k. We assume that the production
requirement Pi t is normally distributed. We note that Pi t
is normally distributed if the demands and noise terms are
normal random variables. We use the mean and variance
of Pi t from Equation (29) and Equation (30), respectively,
to evaluate the first term of the objective function by the
The first set of constraints combines Equations (1) and
(2) for product family k, defining the relationship between
the planning windows, station PLTs, and DLTs for every
routing rk. The second and third sets of constraints ensure a
lower bound of at least ak and bi on the planning windows
and n i k of each workstation i, respectively. A smaller n i k
would imply a need for frequent monitoring at the workstation to track the job progress. Likewise, a short planning
window would require more efforts in monitoring the MPS.
Hence, both ak and bi are managerial inputs that must be
set appropriately in order to avoid complications in production control.
We have not established the convexity of the objective
function. As a consequence we cannot ensure that we obtain the global optimum to this non-linear optimization
program. Nevertheless, from our computational experience
with test problems, we observe that standard non-linear optimization algorithms perform very reliably on this problem: from a wide range of starting points, for each test
problem we always obtain the same solution. In the next
section we report on one computational study. Teo et al.
(2009) report another computational study based on an
application of the model to an oil-rig manufacturer.
We use a real-world setting to illustrate the use of the model
and to draw some insights. We consider a production shop
that is part of a manufacturing facility of an oil-rig builder.
Teo et al. (2009) present a case study on another larger
facility of the same oil-rig builder in which the model’s predictive capability is validated. The data presented in this
section has been altered to protect proprietary information. However, the resulting qualitative relationships and
insights drawn from this example are the same as they
The shop processes and cuts steel plates into required
dimensions, which are then used for downstream production stages to construct the necessary steel assemblies. The
shop operates in an MTO environment because the internal
customer orders are highly customized, resulting in numerous possible cutting dimensions and plate thicknesses. The
delivery lead times for the internal orders are fixed to facilitate planning in the downstream processes. The production
control is based on PLTs in which the production schedules
synchronizes with the “scheduled receipts” of engineering
drawings for the cutting dimensions. In addition, due to
the large physical size of the plates (each weighing 0.5 to 10
tons) and the space constraints in the facilities, the stations
usually produce a quantity that is just sufficient to meet
the station PLTs, to avoid taking up the downstream shop
As part of ongoing improvement efforts, management
was examining how best to group the numerous production
options into product families and how to set PLTs appropriately. In this example, we categorize the customer orders
according to the plate thickness into two product families:
Thick Plates and Thin Plates. The shop consists of four
workstations, namely Blasting, NC (Numerical Control)
Gas Cut, NC Plasma Cut, and Manual Cut. The process
flow map, including the dummy stations to model the MPS
Raw steel plates (both Thick Plates and Thin Plates) are
first sent to the Blasting station where ball grids are splashed
onto the plate surfaces to remove impurities, followed by
an application of a corrosion preventive paint. The blasted
Thick Plates are then transferred to the NC Gas Cut station,
which is capable of cutting the Thick Plates. The blasted
Thin Plates are moved to the NC Plasma Cut station, which
can only cut the Thin Plates. The steel plates are then sent
to the Manual Cut station where the final cutting is done
The demands for both product families have been found
to be i.i.d. over time and are approximately normally distributed. The daily demand for the Thick Plates has a mean
of 20 plates and standard deviation of ten plates, while the
demand for Thin Plates has a mean of 26 plates and standard deviation of 12 plates. The demands for the product
families are uncorrelated. The fixed delivery lead times for
the Thick Plates and Thin Plates are 9 days and 8 days, respectively. We show in Table 2 the expectation and standard
deviation of the effective processing times at each workstation. The standard deviation of the effective processing time
is mainly due to the different processing requirements for
the different plates. Table 2 shows the nominal capacity
available per day in workhours. Each workstation has flexibility to expand its capacity in each day by subcontracting
its production to nearby shops. The subcontracting cost
per hour for outstanding work at each workstation is also
We set up the workflow matrices for Thick Plates and
Thin Plates, denoted by Thick and Thin respectively, as:
For example, each workhour at Blasting generates on
average 1.69/0.55 = 3.08 workhours for the NC Gas Cut
station; i.e., φ43 = 3.08. To set up the variance of the vector ζt , we note that the off-diagonal terms of the matrix
are all equal zero as there is assumed to be no correlation
between the demands or the random variability at the stations. We set the diagonal elements for the dummy stations
(first two rows) equal to the variance of the daily demand;
the diagonal elements for the workstations (bottom four
rows) represent the variance of the noise terms Var(ξi t )
due to the variability in the processing times, which we set
to the variance of the workload for the mean number of
jobs processed at the station per day. For example, at the
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
The expectation and standard deviation of processing times at the Blasting station are identical for both product families.
Blasting station, the mean number of Thick Plates processed per day is 20 and the standard deviation of the processing time is 0.35 hour, which Var(ξi t ) = 20(0.35)2 = 2.45
hour2 . We assume that the noise term at each station is
normally distributed. The matrices for the variances of ζ t
In the base case, the raw plates are “pushed” into production with planning window Wk = 1 (i.e., no smoothing of
the MPS). Each station has a common station PLT n i k
for both product families. Table 3 shows the values of Wk
and n i . The table also shows the computed mean and standard deviation of the production requirement as well as
the queue length at each station. Due to the normality assumption for the demands and variability at each station,
the production requirements at the stations are also normally distributed; this allows us to compute the probability
of subcontracting. We also compute the expected subcontracting cost and holding cost per day, which are also shown
The release into the production shop is highly variable as
there is no smoothing of the MPS. At the Blasting station,
there is a relatively high probability of 0.21 that the shop
has to subcontract the outstanding work. The expected
subcontracting cost of the Blasting station is $223.40 per
day. The other workstations have much lower probabilities
of insufficient nominal capacity. The queue length at the
Manual Cut station is the highest, with 293.8 hours of workin-queue, resulting in a daily holding cost of $216.50.
We increase the planning windows of each product family
to 3 days. To keep the delivery lead time fixed, this increase
in the planning window must be compensated by a reduction of the station PLTs at the stations. We observe in the
base case that the Manual Cut station has the second lowest expected subcontracting cost and the highest inventory
holding cost. Hence, we choose to reduce the station PLT
of the Manual Cut station from 3 days to 1 day.
Table 4 shows that the releases for both product families
become less variable. The standard deviation of the release
for Thick Plates falls from 10 to 4.47 plates and that for
the Thin Plates from 12 to 5.37 plates. The smoother release results in less variable job arrivals at the workstations
which in turn causes smoother production requirements.
For example, the standard deviation of production requirements for the Blasting station decreases from 3.38 hours
in the base case to 2.76 hours. This leads to a reduction
in the probability of subcontracting at the Blasting station
from 0.21 to 0.16, with a corresponding fall in expected
subcontracting cost from $223.40 to $119.60. The NC Gas
Cut and the NC Plasma Cut also undergo a reduction in
expected subcontracting costs due to the less variable work
arrival from the Blasting station; this illustrates how production variability at an upstream station can affect the
The Manual Cut station experiences two opposite effects
on its production variability. On the one hand, the longer
planning windows lead to smoother job arrivals to the station, but it now has a shorter station PLT to smooth the
arrival variability. The combined effect causes an increase in
production variability at the workstation. We note that its
expected subcontracting cost rises from $21.37 to $77.14.
However, its queue length decreases from 293.79 hours to
97.9 hours with a decline in expected holding cost from
$216.50 to $72.12. Overall, the expected total cost for the
shop falls from $712.86 in the base case to $495.33.
We obtain the optimal planning windows and station PLTs
using the optimization model in Section 7, where we set
ak = 1 for all k and bi = 1 for all i . The optimal solution
and associated results are shown in Table 5. The optimal
solution involves further reducing the station PLTs of the
Blasting station and NC Plasma Cut station and to a lesser
extent the NC Gas Cut station; in turn, the planning windows are increased. Even though the total expected subcontracting cost increases, the decrease in the total expected
holding cost more than offsets this increase; thus, it leads to
a reduction in the total cost. The minimum expected total
cost is $464.09, which translates into a 34.9% cost savings
In addition, we can also use the model for various “what–
if” analyses. For example: what if the delivery lead time is
reduced? What if the nominal capacity at a station is increased? We can also utilize the model to determine the impact of unplanned changes: what if the demand increases?
Planned lead times for a make-to-order system
If the subcontracting costs are raised, should we acquire
more capacity? The model can be employed to determine
the impact of these changes on the expected total cost to
In this article, we model an MTO manufacturing environment that has a fixed quoted delivery lead time. We focus
on the setting of the planning windows and station PLTs,
which are two key tactical planning parameters. We develop for a single aggregate product a workflow model that
allows intra-period workflows. We show how to characterize the production requirements as well as the expected
queue lengths for each workstation. We then extend the
single-family model to systems with multiple families. We
embed the model into a non-linear optimization program
to find the optimal values of the planning parameters.
We illustrate the use of the model with a small case example from a shop that processes steel plates for oil-rig
One possible extension to this research is to model the
stability of the MPS when it is subject to changes in customer orders. In our model, we assume that there is no
change to the order quantity after the customer order is
received. However, in many MTO firms, it is common for
customers to adjust or modify their orders within the delivery lead time. Thus, an important enhancement to the
model would be to incorporate the dynamics of the MPS
and its impact on the production flow, especially in light of
the techniques that are used to achieve a stable MPS; e.g.,
firm planned orders, frozen time periods, and time fencing
It would also be worthwhile to explore how the model
can be employed to provide feedback in supporting the setting of the fixed quoted delivery lead time. The feedback
mechanism would be equivalent to the approach in hierarchical planning, wherein our model serves as a disaggregation model that provides feedback to the more aggregate
models (see, for example, So and Song (1998) and Rao et al.
(2005)) that determine the fixed quoted delivery lead time.
It would facilitate the capturing of the problem at different
detail levels; i.e., aggregated data for setting the fixed lead
time and more detailed production data for determining
This research has been supported by the Singapore–MIT
Alliance (SMA) program. The authors thank the Departmental Editor, Associate Editor, and three anonymous referees for their valuable comments which greatly improved
Asmundsson, J.M., Rardin, R.L. and Uzsoy, R. (2006) Tractable nonlinear production planning models for semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing,
Baker, K.R. (1984) Sequencing rules and due-date assignments in a job
Bertrand, J.W.M. and Van Ooijen, H.P.G. (2002) Workload based order
release and productivity: a missing link. Production Planning and
Cheng, T.C.E. and Gupta, M.C. (1989) Survey of scheduling research
involving due date determination decisions. European Journal of
Cruickshanks, A.B., Drescher, R.D. and Graves, S.C. (1984) A study
of production smoothing in a job shop environment. Management
Fine, C.H. and Graves, S.C. (1989) A tactical planning model for manufacturing subcomponents in mainframe computers. Journal of Manufacturing and Operations Management, 2(1), 4–34.
Gong, L., De. Kok, T. and Ding, J. (1994) Optimal leadtimes planning in
a serial production system. Management Science, 40(5), 629–632.
Graves, S.C. (1986). A tactical planning model for a job shop. Operations
Graves, S.C. (1988a) Determining the spares and staffing levels for a repair
depot. Journal of Manufacturing and Operations Management, 1(2),
Graves, S.C. (1988b) Extensions to a tactical planning model for a job
shop. in Proceedings of the 27th IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, pp. 1850–1855.
Graves, S.C. (1988c) Safety stocks in manufacturing systems. Journal of
Manufacturing and Operations Management, 1(1) 67–101.
Graves, S.C. and Hollywood, J.S. (2001) A constant-inventory tactical
planning model for a job shop. Working paper, MIT, Cambridge,
Graves, S.C., Kletter, D.B. and Hetzel, W.B. (1998) A dynamic model for
requirements planning with application to supply chain optimization. Operations Research, 46(3), 35–49.
Hollywood, J.S. (2005) An approximate planning model for distributed
computing networks. Naval Research Logistics, 52(6), 590–605.
Holt, C.C., Modigliani, F., Muth, J.F. and Simon, H.A. (1960) Planning
Production, Inventories and Work Force, Prentice Hall, Englewood
Hopp, W.J. and Spearman, M.L. (2001) Factory Physics: Foundations of
Manufacturing Management, second edition, Irwin McGraw Hill,
Kanet, J.J. (1986) Toward a better understanding of lead times in MRP
systems. Journal of Operations Management, 6(3), 305–315.
Karmarkar, U.S. (1989) Capacity loading and release planning with
work-in-progress (WIP) and lead-times. Journal of Manufacturing
Karmarkar, U.S. (1993) Manufacturing lead times, order release and
capacity loading, in Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, Volume 4. Logistics of Production and Inventory, Graves, S.C., Rinnooy Kan, A.H., Zipkin, P.H. (eds), NorthHolland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 287–329.
Keskinocak, P. and Tayur, S. (2004) Due date management policies, in
Handbook of Quantitative Supply Chain Analysis; Modeling in the
E-Business Era, Simchi-Levi, D., Wu, S.-D. and Shen, Z.-M. (eds),
Matsuura, H. and Tsubone, H. (1993) Setting planned lead times in
capacity requirements planning. Journal of the Operational Research
Matsuura, H., Tsubone, H. and Kanezashi, M. (1996) Setting planned
lead times for multi operation jobs. European Journal of Operational
Rao, U.S., Swaminathan, J.M. and Zhang, J. (2005) Demand and production with uniform guaranteed lead time. Production and Operations
Robinson, A. (1999) Toyota to test quick turn on Solara, available at
http://www.automotivenews.com (accessed January 4, 2010).
Selcuk, B., Fransoo, J.C. and De Kok, A.G. (2008) Work in process clearing in supply chain operations planning. IIE Transactions, 40(3),
So, K.C. and Song, J.-S. (1998) Price, delivery time guarantees and capacity selection. European Journal of Operational Research, 111, 28–
Teo, C.C. (2006) A tactical planning model for make-to-order environment under demand uncertainty. Ph.D. Thesis, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (Singapore–MIT Alliance).
Teo, C.C., Bhatnagar, R. and Graves, S.C. (2009) An application of master
schedule smoothing and planned lead times control. Production &
Vollmann, T.E., Berry, W.L., Whybark, D.C. and Jacobs, F.R. (2005)
Manufacturing Planning and Control for Supply Chain Management,
fifth edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Weeks, J.K. (1978) Optimizing planned lead times and delivery date, in
Proceedings of the 21st American Production and Inventory Control
Weng, K.Z. (1999) Strategies for integrating lead time and customerorder decisions. IIE Transactions, 31(2), 161–171.
Yano, C.A. (1987) Setting planning leadtimes in serial production systems
with earliness costs. Management Science, 33(1), 95–106.
We consider a product family with DLTk = 4, PPLT = 2,
and planning window of length = 4 – 2 + 1 = 3. The current period is t = 0. The production planner has to decide
on the MPS and the planned releases over the planning
horizon that ranges from t = 0 to t = 4. To simplify the
example, there are no orders after period t = 4 and there is
no planned inventory at t = 1. We illustrate the smoothing
The second row shows orders contracted to be delivered
in each period, from t = 2 to 4. We do not state the order
quantities for period t = 0 and t = 1, as they are already
in process and are thus inconsequential. In this example,
we smooth the MPS by spreading the orders as evenly as
possible over the planning window, which ranges from t =
2 to t = 4; in particular, we level the MPS at 20 units
for each period of the planning window. Since the order
quantity in t = 2 is only ten units, the MPS results in a
planned inventory of ten units in period t = 2 that is carried
over to period t = 3 and is finally applied to the order in
t = 4. Furthermore, since the PPLTk = 2, we release jobs
two periods earlier to meet the corresponding MPS. For
instance, we plan to release 20 units at t = 0 to meet the
Chee-Chong Teo is an Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological
University (NTU), Singapore. He received his B.Eng. from NTU and
both his M.Sc and Ph.D from the Singapore–MIT Alliance Program.
Since 2006, he has been a faculty member at the School of Civil &
Environmental Engineering. At NTU, he teaches courses in supply chain
management and freight transportation. His research interests are in
operations management in the context of production–inventory systems
Rohit Bhatnagar is an Associate Professor at Nanyang Business School,
NTU, Singapore, and Faculty Fellow of the Singapore–MIT Alliance
Program. He received his B.Tech. from IT-BHU, India; M.B.A. from the
Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, India; and Ph.D. in Operations Management from McGill University, Canada. He teaches courses
in operations management, supply chain management, quality management, and quantitative methods. His recent research has focused on a
variety of design and planning issues in manufacturing and supply chain
systems, including problems arising in facility location, supply routing,
and inventory optimization. He has served as an Assessor for the Singapore Quality Award and Manufacturing Excellence Award (MAXA).
Stephen C. Graves is the Abraham J. Siegel Professor of Management
Science at MIT. He received his A.B. and M.B.A. from Dartmouth College and completed his Ph.D. in Operations Research at the University
of Rochester. Since 1977 he has been a faculty member at the MIT Sloan
School of Management. He has joint faculty appointments with both
the Mechanical Engineering Department and the Engineering Systems
Division at MIT. He is a Faculty Fellow of the Singapore–MIT Alliance.
He teaches classes in supply chain planning and design and his primary
research interests are in the design and planning of manufacturing systems and supply chains; recent efforts have considered supply-chain optimization, the evaluation of manufacturing flexibility, and various tactical
issues arising in e-retailing. As of January 2009 he is the editor-in-chief of
Manufacturing & Services Operations Management, the INFORMS journal for operations management. He has been selected as an INFORMS
Fellow, an MSOM Fellow, and a POMS Fellow.
Copyright of IIE Transactions is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
