European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejor
Modeling the dynamics of a multi-product manufacturing system:
Juliana Keiko Sagawa a,∗, Marcelo Seido Nagano b
Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil, Rodovia Washington Luís - Km 235, 13565-905, São Carlos – SP, Brazil
School of Engineering of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, Brazil, Av. Trabalhador Sãocarlense, 400 Centro, 13566-590, São Carlos – SP, Brazil
In this paper, a continuous multi-product model is developed to represent the shop ﬂoor dynamics of a
job shop, based on dynamic modeling and on analogies to electrical components. This approach allows the
mathematical formulation of the model (state representation) and the analysis of its dynamic response via
simulation. A real case application in the textile industry is presented. Thus, this research contributes in
the following ways: ﬁrst, proposing a model that is suitable for multi-product systems with intricate job
shop conﬁguration and that is generalizable to various manufacturing systems; second, presenting a real
case application of the proposed model. As practical implications, it provides production managers and
practitioners with a prescriptive decision model that considers the dynamics of the production systems and
the interdependencies of the decisions made in the shop ﬂoor. From the academic perspective, it contributes
to the existing literature by presenting the application of an alternative modeling methodology, and by
extending this methodology to manufacturing systems with multiple products, instead of single-product
systems. Continuous models such as the one proposed can beneﬁt from a wide range of tools for system
analysis and control design, come from control theory. Although these tools have been extensively applied
to model the supply chain, applications devoted to the plant level seem to be neglected over the past years.
This model also aims to contribute in this direction.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Customers of this era usually expect innovative and differentiated products that are suitable to their individual needs (Jitapaiboon,
Dobrzykowski, Ragu-Nathan, & Vonderembse, 2013; Piller, Moeslein,
& Stotko, 2004). This trend requests customer-oriented systems that
can produce customized products at low costs, aligned to the concept
of mass-customization (Liu, Shah, & Schroeder, 2012). Furthermore,
in several manufacturing environments, the production systems are
subjected to disturbances of many sources, such as changes on product demand and customer requirements, machine breakdowns, urgent jobs, absenteeism, ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations, and so on. All these
factors demand agility. Agile companies distinguish themselves by
means of their speed in the planning and execution process, as well
as their adaptability to changing conditions in the production environment (Wiendahl & Breithaupt, 2000).
Despite the depicted context, most of the available models to analyze production-inventory systems are based on average performance
Corresponding author. Tel.: +55 16 3351 9511/ 55 16 3351 8237;
E-mail addresses: juliana@dep.ufscar.br, j.ksag@yahoo.com.br (J. K. Sagawa),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.01.017
0377-2217/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
or steady-state conditions (Ortega & Lin, 2004; Suri & Desiraju, 1997).
The same applies to the models for production scheduling. Lately,
a reasonable amount of models for dynamic scheduling have been
developed (Barrena, Canca, Coelho, & Laporte, 2014; Chiang, Cheng,
& Fu, 2010; Jang, 2002; Weng & Fujimura, 2012); however, the vast
majority of the scheduling theory considers a static rather than a dynamic situation, as highlighted by Wang and Uzsoy (2002) and Weng,
The manufacturing and supply chain management areas can certainly beneﬁt from the application of dynamic modeling and control theory. One contribution refers to possibility of interpreting the
planning and execution processes not as isolated domains but as an
adaptive process. In addition, the perspective of dynamics allows to
capture and cope with the changes in supply chain and the environment, and to optimize performance indicators that are diﬃcult
to express in the static and discrete time models. Yet, the utilization
of control theory gives way to important kinds of analysis, such as
stability, robustness and adaptability analysis of a supply chain or
manufacturing system (Ivanov, Dolgui, & Sokolov, 2012).
In spite of these potential beneﬁts, different authors argue that
the domain of dynamics in the supply chain area should receive
more attention (Ivanov, et al., 2012; Proth, 2007; Sarimveis, Patrinos,
Tarantilis, & Kiranoudis, 2008). The literature lacks systematic
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
analyses and documentation of the impact of dynamics on supply
chain proﬁtability, both at the planning level—concerning uncertainties and robustness to dynamic events, and at the execution control
level—considering adaptive (re)planning and (re)scheduling (Ivanov
et al., 2012). Thus, further research on the dynamics and control of
manufacturing systems and supply chain is paramount to fulﬁll these
gaps. System Dynamics and Control Theory provide a range of tools
for modeling and analyzing dynamic systems that can be suitably applied to production planning and control of manufacturing systems
In this paper, a multi-product model to represent the shop ﬂoor
dynamics of a job shop is proposed. The model is based on analogies between production entities, such as machines and stocks, and
electrical components, such as capacitors and resistors. The equations
that represent the system behavior are derived from the properties of
these components. The proposed model is applied to depict a manufacturing system of polypropylene woven bags, using real data from
a package company. Emphasis is set on the modeling of the system
and on the mathematical development of the state equations.
From the academic perspective, this paper aims to present the
application of an alternative modeling approach and to evaluate its
potential of generalization to different multi-product manufacturing systems. The proposed model is based to some extent on basic
manufacturing entities proposed by Ferney (2000), which were only
applied to a theoretical single-product production system. Therefore,
this paper also contributes to extend the existing approach so that it
can be applied to manufacturing systems with multiple products. The
case presented illustrates the applicability of the model in a practical
situation, using ﬁeld data and parameters of an actual manufacturing
system. As practical implications, this research provides production
managers and practitioners with a prescriptive decision model that
considers the dynamics of the production systems and show the interdependencies of the decisions made in the shop ﬂoor.
Most of the extant control theory research applied to manufacturing concerns production inventory-systems in the context of supply
chain, as it can be seen in Ortega and Lin (2004) and Sarimveis et al.
(2008). As mentioned, the speciﬁc literature lacks a larger variety of
models devoted to scheduling and shop ﬂoor (short-term) production
control. The proposed model also attempts to lessen this gap.
According to Sarimveis et al. (2008) some assumptions on which
the dynamic models of supply chain stand upon are not valid in reality. In some models, the stocks are not bounded below by zero neither
bounded above due to limited storage capacities. Moreover, the models usually represent single stage systems, considering the production
of a single product or the total aggregate production. The proposed
model presents limitations, as any other model. The shop ﬂoor behavior is not analyzed at the level of individual products, i.e., the model
does not consider the scheduling of individual jobs. In addition, differences in the processing times of products belonging to different families are also not taken into account. Nonetheless, the proposed model
overcomes one of the usual limitations of the production-inventory
and supply chain models by considering the production of several
products grouped into different families. The intermediate stocks are
also bounded below by zero. If a given intermediate stock reaches
this condition, the downstream machine gets idle, which accurately
In the next section, a literature review of control theory applications to production systems and supply chains is presented. The
Section 2.1 speciﬁcally addresses the mathematical formulation of
the basic production entities used in the model. Section 3 presents
the development of this model, encompassing the description of the
production process and of the product families, the formulation of the
state equations and the simulation of the model, based on the state
equations. The preliminary results of the simulation are presented
and discussed in section 4. Finally, the conclusions and suggestions
for future research are presented in section 5.
2. Control theory applied to manufacturing systems
Some major research efforts for applying control theoretic methods to production-inventory systems are reviewed by Ortega and Lin
(2004) and Sarimveis et al. (2008). The ﬁrst models date from 1950s,
with Simon (1952) and Vassian (1955), followed by Forrester (1961),
with the book “Industrial Dynamics” and Axsäter (1976). Later on, the
inventory and order based production control system (IOBPCS) was
presented by Towill (1982). This model was developed with more analytical support from control theory tools. Its fundamental parameters
were the production delay time (i.e. production lead time), the timeto-adjust inventory, and the demand averaging time (Towill, 1982).
In Wikner, Naim, and Towill (1992), likewise, three main elements
were considered: manufacturing lead times, replenishment rules (or
order policies) and forecasting. The lead times and replenishment
rules were represented by expressions in the frequency domains.
In these production-inventory systems, the inventory and work-inprocess levels are usually transmitted as feedback information, while
demand forecast is used as feedforward data.
In Ortega and Lin (2004), the production and inventory models
are further subdivided into two groups. The ﬁrst group comprises the
“horizontal extensions” of the basic deterministic models, and refers
to the models that depict the supply chain dynamics (Arda & Hennet,
2006; Dejonckheere, Disney, Lambrecht, & Towill, 2002, 2003, 2004;
Disney, Naim, & Towill, 2000; Evans, Naim, & Towill, 1998; Nabais,
Negenborn, Carmona Benitez, & Botto, 2013; Wang, Liu, Zheng, & Wu,
2008; Zhou, Disney, & Towill, 2010). Most of these models aim at
ﬁnding an optimum order policy to reduce the bullwhip effect, i.e.,
The second group encompasses multi-echelon models for lot size
optimization, i.e., for determining optimum batch sizes and release
dates for the production orders (Bogataj & Horvat, 1996; Grubbström,
2005; Grubbström, Bogataj, & Bogataj, 2010; Grubbström &
Molinder, 1996; Grubbström & Ovrin, 1992; Grubbström & Tang,
2000). These models are based on the input–output analysis and
make use of the bill of materials (BOM) as an input matrix for the
production-inventory system. Since the BOM is a hierarchical representation of the assemblies and components that form a ﬁnal product,
these models were categorized by Ortega and Lin (2004) as “hierarchical approaches” or “vertical extensions” of the basic productioninventory systems. Multi-echelon models are also used to represent
distribution inventory systems with a central warehouse and a number of retailers, as in Axsäter (2001, 2003) and Axsater, Olsson and
As mentioned, many of the studies on the single-echelon or multiechelon production-inventory models focus on lot sizing optimization, i.e. the deﬁnition of optimal ordering policies. From the perspective of dynamics, it is interesting to consider how the information
delays affect these models, such as in Bensoussan, Çakanyıldırım,
and Sethi (2007). They introduced dynamic information delays as
a Markov process into the standard multiperiod stochastic inventory problem with backorders. With these delays, the most recent
inventory information is not available to the manager, that is, only
an inventory level of some periods ago and related delay statistics
can be observed. The authors introduce three statistics/concepts: the
reference inventory position, which is the sum of the latest observed
inventory level and all the orders placed since that observation; the
magnitude of the latest observed delay; the age of this observation,
i.e. the number of periods elapsed since the observation. With these
statistics, a state reduction was achieved and an optimal policy of
state-dependent base-stock type was found.
The classiﬁcation of the production-inventory and supply chain
models into “horizontal” or “vertical” extensions is inspired in Axsäter
(1985). This author discusses two approaches two simplify models
and deal with non-linear conﬁgurations and uncertainties. The ﬁrst
one refers to the assumption of the certainty-equivalence principle;
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
in this case, models with uncertainties are approximated by deterministic models based on averages. The second option is the use of
a hierarchical approach. Planning at a higher aggregate level usually leads to fewer (aggregate) variables to deal with. In addition,
non-linear effects that occur at lower levels may be disregarded. The
classiﬁcation presented by Ortega and Lin (2004) is based on these
In Hennet (2009), a model that could be considered as both a “horizontal” and a “vertical” extension of the production-inventory system
is presented. In this work, a network of autonomous enterprises with
distributed decisional structure is represented as a multistage manufacturing model. The product structure (BOM) dictates the organization of the network. Thus, producers of primary products play the role
of suppliers, while producers of intermediate products play both roles
of suppliers and producers; similarly, producers of end products are
both producers and retailers. In the multistage model considered, it is
assumed that the information available at each stage is mainly local.
It is also supposed that each stage adopts a base-stock policy applied
to the inventory positions. As main results, it was found that under
some traditional assumptions, such as ﬁxed lead times and common
order periodicity, the local base stock policies are equivalent to an
integrated policy. In other words, the local ordering and production
policies may perform as well as an optimal global policy under some
assumptions. As mentioned, this approach considers both the “horizontal” and “vertical” dimensions, since the supply chain behavior is
modeled using the hierarchical product structure as a link between
The review presented by Ortega and Lin (2004) was complemented
by Sarimveis et al. (2008), Ivanov et al. (2012) and Sagawa and Nagano
(2013). In Sarimveis et al. (2008), besides the classical control methodologies reviewed in Ortega and Lin (2004), applications of advanced
control methodologies for supply chain modeling are presented. In
the applications of classical control, most of the analysis concerns
continuous or discrete linear systems, whose dynamics is modeled
using Laplace transfer functions and z transfer functions. Standard
analysis tools, such as Bode and Nyquist plots are used to evaluate
the alternative designs. The advanced control methodologies, according to Sarimveis et al. (2008), are basically optimal control methods
aiming at the optimization of an objective function that measures the
performance of the system. As known, the basis of optimal control theory stands on dynamic programming and Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
equations (Bertsekas, 2000). In addition to the classical control and the
dynamic programming approaches to supply chain modeling, three
additional categories of papers are reviewed in Sarimveis et al. (2008).
The ﬁrst one concerns model predictive control (MPC) techniques
that have been recently used in supply chain management problems.
These techniques are applied when the models based on dynamic
programming and optimal control cannot be solved analytically, due
to its large dimension (the curse of dimensionality). The second additional category comprises applications of robust control theory. In
this case, the disturbances that affect the supply chain are modeled as
deterministic uncertain-but-bounded quantities. Finally, the last category refers to the alternative methods that have been developed to
cope with the curse of dimensionality in dynamic programming and
with the lack of an accurate model to represent the stochastic system
under study. These methods usually make use of artiﬁcial intelligence
tools, and are referred to as reinforcement learning techniques, neurodynamic programming or approximate dynamic programming.
In the review presented by Ivanov et al. (2012), the control theoretic approaches to supply chain are classiﬁed into ﬁve problem
areas: dynamic inventory control policies, optimal multi-stage and
multi-period production planning, analysis of disturbances and ﬂuctuations, integrated marketing-production decisions, and adaptation and real-time control. The ﬁrst area of classiﬁcation encompasses all the production-inventory and the multi-echelon systems
developed with the aid of Classic Control Theory. In this sense, this
category is equivalent to the one proposed by Sarimveis et al. (2008),
and includes both the horizontal and vertical extensions proposed
by Ortega and Lin (2004). The second area refers to the applications
of production planning mainly based on Optimal Control and Dynamic Programming. The third area includes the studies on stability
and the bullwhip effect, such as the ones developed by Burns and
Sivazlian (1978), Daganzo (2004), Dejonckheere et al. (2002, 2003,
2004), among others. The application of control approaches to
production-marketing decisions concerns advertising models and optimal pricing and production models (He, Prasad, & Sethi, 2009; Kogan
& Herbon, 2008), constituting the fourth category in the classiﬁcation proposed by Ivanov et al. (2012). Finally, in the area of adaptation and real-time control, the aforementioned authors group the
models based on model predictive control devoted to multi-echelon
When speciﬁcally considering the second category of classiﬁcation, the optimal control approach, Ivanov et al. (2012) highlight an
important aspect of many models for supply chain optimization: besides being based on information sharing and coordination, they assume full information availability. In most of the times, however, it
is not possible to have all the information on the supply chain dynamics at the initial planning time, and the chain is subjected to dynamic changes and coordination problems. These facts reiterate the
importance of models for adaptive planning and scheduling. Also, for
these cases, the mentioned authors highlight the great applicability
of the maximum principle (Pontryagin, Boltyanskii, Gamkrelidze, &
Mishchenko, 1964). As known, this principle allows decomposing an
optimal control problem into sub-problems, assuring that the optimal solutions of the instantaneous sub-problems lead to the optimal
Khmelnitsky, Kogan, and Maimon (1997) developed maximum principle-based methods to cope with production scheduling problems in complex manufacturing systems. They employed a
continuous-time optimal control approach and presented a general
numerical method for partially sequence-dependent setup scheduling based on the properties of optimality derived from the maximum
principle analysis. The computational complexity of the presented algorithm depends on its initialization, i.e. on the proper guess of the initial values for the variables. They showed that the use of an adequate
shooting method for seeking these initial values may improve the
performance of the algorithm. In addition, the computational complexity is related to the number of machine setups required to meet a
given demand proﬁle. The search space of admissible setups is quite
large and the scheduling problem has many local optima that satisfy the optimality conditions, due to its combinatorial nature. Thus,
the aforementioned authors proposed a maximum principle-based
heuristic for reducing the setup alternatives, which speeded up the
algorithm. As a result, the proposed algorithm outperformed a traditional algorithm based on a two level hierarchical approach.
A more speciﬁc framework to classify the control theory applications in supply chain was proposed by Ivanov and Sokolov (2013)
considering the impact of uncertainty on supply chain performance
in the dynamic domain. The authors presented a systematic representation of the supply chain dynamics taxonomy, aiming to approximate the terminology used in control theory to the practical problems in supply chains. In addition, they analyzed the existing control
tools for synthesis and analysis of performance that can be used in
the supply chain domain, concerning the uncertainty-performance
relationship. Based on this relationship, the problems were divided
into seven classes: stability, robustness, resilience, security, ﬂexibility, disruption-tolerance and complexity.
According to Ivanov and Sokolov (2013), the ﬁrst class encompasses the problems that investigate the supply chain’s ability to continue the planned execution after being subjected to perturbations,
such as demand ﬂuctuations. In terms of control theory, this analysis
considers the supply chain current state and current performance.
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
The studies found in the literature about this topic usually considered
Lyapunov’s stability or the BIBO (bounded-input-bounded-output)
stability for control systems (Ivanov & Sokolov, 2013; Liao, Wang, &
Besides being stable, the supply chain should also bring proﬁts.
Thus, the analyses must also include the achievement of performance
targets. In the second class of problems deﬁned, the ability to remain
stable and achieve the planned performance in the presence of perturbations is investigated. According to the control perspective, this
ability is named robustness, and its analysis considers not only the
current state of the supply chain, but also a comparison between the
planned and the current performance, based on a matrix of performance measures. The robustness is related, among other factors, to
the existence of redundancies and reserves, such as safety stocks, time
buffers, additional facilities and capacity reserves. The studies in this
class usually employ robust and stochastic optimization methods.
The resilience, which is the property analyzed in the third class
of studies, refers to the ability to maintain, execute and adapt the
planned execution along with the achievement of the planned (or
adapted) performance (Ivanov & Sokolov, 2013). During execution,
when the supply chain is affected by perturbations and the redundancies are not enough to cope with them, the perturbations lead
to disturbance and it becomes necessary to correct the plans by adjustable control actions. Thus, the analysis of resilience should also
take into account the updated decision-making space and the disturbance (in addition to the factors considered in the previous classes of
problems). According to Ivanov and Sokolov (2013), model predictive
control is one methodology often used in the research on supply chain
Security, the fourth class of studies presented by the aforementioned authors, is very similar to problem class 2, with the difference
that it considers intentional perturbations instead of casual ones.
The ﬁfth problem class investigates the ﬂexibility, which is the
ability to avoid disturbance by quickly changing the supply chain
structurally and functionally. Disturbances may be compensated and
ﬂexibility may be increased by means of: ﬁnancial asset reserves;
product ﬂexibility and modularity; supply chain coordination; monitoring and event management, etc. (Ivanov & Sokolov, 2013). The
aforementioned authors highlight the need for further systematic research on the problems of this class.
A disruption occurs when a disturbance in the planned execution
of the supply chain cannot be compensated by an adaptive control
action to achieve the planned performance outputs. In this case, the
replanning of output performance and the generation of new plans
are necessary. The sixth class of problems thus investigates the tolerance to disruptions or the adaptability of the supply chain, which is
related to the “creation of an adaptation system for the prevention,
improvement or acquisition of new characteristics for the achievement of planned performance in existing or updated decision making
Finally, the last problem class pointed out by the mentioned authors concerns to the investigation of complexity in the light of robustness, ﬂexibility and economic performance. Attempts to increase
robustness, ﬂexibility or economic performance usually lead to an increased complexity. Nonetheless, if the complexity becomes too high,
the system may become too sensitive to perturbations and may even
Besides the different schemes presented so far to classify the control theoretic models applied to supply chain, there is still an alternative classiﬁcation, presented by Sagawa and Nagano (2013). They
adopt the same criterion used by Ortega and Lin (2004) to classify
the control theoretic approaches for production and supply chain
systems, i.e., the models are classiﬁed according to the area of application. Besides the “horizontal” (supply chain systems) and “vertical”
dimensions (multi-echelon systems), an additional category is proposed, encompassing the applications of control theory to Operations
Multi-echelon productioninventory systems
Fig. 1. Proposed areas for classifying the models of Production Planning and Control
Scheduling and short-term shop ﬂoor control (Fig. 1). In the previous
review presented by Ortega and Lin (2004), only a couple works related to this application were found. Lately, few more models have
been developed. A comparative table and discussion of these models
is presented in Sagawa and Nagano (2013).
During the period between 1980 and 1990, the concepts of supply chain and supply chain integration were widely spread. Sipper
and Bulﬁn (1997) highlight an important feature of the "new" market driven production systems: the extension of the scope of the
business to encompass the relationships of the focal company with
its suppliers and customers. From this perspective, manufacturing
systems started to be viewed not as isolated systems, but as part
of a whole supply chain. Thus, the set of control theoretic applications for supply chain may also include manufacturing applications.
In this paper, however, the category “programming and control systems” (Fig. 1) was detached from the category “horizontal/supply
chain systems” for the sake of emphasizing the models speciﬁcally
developed for the plant level of a focal company (and for short term
The Automatic Production Control (APC) system presented by
Wiendahl and Breithaupt (1999, 2000) can be classiﬁed in this third
group of application, i.e., among the models developed for scheduling
and shop ﬂoor control. The model stands on an analogy with ﬂuid
mechanics and depicts the behavior of a stochastic job shop system.
The work-in-process (WIP) of a work center is represented as a ﬂow
network in continuous time. Thus, the work-in-process of a given
work center k is obtained by adding the initial inventory of center k to
the actual cumulative input of the upstream work centers ﬂowing to
k and to the external input of jobs. From this summation, the cumulative output of center k until time t must be subtracted. Simplifying,
these operations represent the difference between the different input
ﬂows coming to the center and its output ﬂow. In order to derive the
equations of the model, the theory of the logistic operating curves
and the funnel formula area also applied. For more details Sagawa
and Nagano (2013), Wiendahl (1995), and Wiendahl and Breithaupt
The job shop conﬁguration is represented in the APC system using transition probabilities, which can be derived from a material ﬂow
matrix (MFM). This matrix contains real data from the job shop, showing the amount of material or the number of orders that ﬂow from a
work center to another. The transition probabilities are obtained with
the normalization of the material ﬂow matrix.
In the APC system (Wiendahl & Breithaupt, 2000), two controllers
were applied: a backlog controller and a WIP controller. The backlog
of a system may be deﬁned as the difference between the planned
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
sum of work and the actual output. Thus, the backlog controller adds
capacity to the system when the actual output is below the planned
output. In this case, the capacity is the correcting variable whereas
the planned output is the reference variable of the system. The WIP
controller, on its turn, adjusts the input rate of the system in such a
way that there is enough work to be processed but without too long
queues. In other words, this controller sets the system to an adequate
operating point, maximizing the output rate while at the same time
keeping the production lead times at reasonable values.
Kim and Duﬃe (2006) proposed a coupled closed-loop model for
short term capacity control that has similarities with the APC system previously discussed. Likewise in the APC model, the input rate
is the sum of the output rates from all preceding workstations and
any external input, and the actual WIP is given by the accumulated
difference between the input and output rates of the kth workstation, plus any work disturbances such as rush orders. The MFM is
also employed to compile the different amounts of orders sent to
each workstation. The actual work in process level of a given kth
workstation is compared to the planned level and, based on this WIP
error, the workstation is controlled by a local capacity control policy,
taking into account its planned capacity. The initial model proposed
(Kim & Duﬃe, 2005) did not include any coupling between the capacity control of a given station and the capacity decisions made in
the upstream stations. In a subsequent model (Kim & Duﬃe, 2006),
these capacity decisions of upstream stations were added as inputs for
the capacity control loop of a given downstream station. This model
was applied to a manufacturing system with ﬁve workstations, using production data from a forging company that supplies components to the automotive industry. The system was simulated based
on a characteristic transfer equation and the results showed that
the coupling between workstations prevented the propagation of the
WIP error to downstream workstations, thus improving the system
An integral controller is used by Cho and Erkoc (2009) and Prabhu
and Duﬃe (1999) for scheduling jobs in a ﬂow shop system. Each job to
be scheduled has an embedded controller, named Distributed Arrival
Time Controller (DATC), that determines its arrival time (i.e., starting
time) in order to minimize lateness. In other words, in each iteration,
the controller adjusts the starting time of a given job i so that it may
be completed as close as possible to its due date. The completion time
of the parts is then calculated by a shop ﬂoor simulator based on the
current starting times and the processing times of the jobs.
It is important to highlight that, in the aforementioned system, the
principles of feedback control are applied to generate the scheduling algorithm, rather than to represent the dynamics of the scheduling system or the dynamics of a manufacturing system. The algorithm that uses the expression of an integral controller is applied
to scheduling problems of static nature. The integral controller of
DATC works as a search engine that replaces the traditional heuristics
used in scheduling problems, but is not directly applied to dynamic
Another model for operations scheduling with a feedback loop
is presented by Li (2011). In this model, the jobs are scheduled ofﬂine using an extension of Johnson’s algorithm. After that, the execution of the proposed schedule is simulated using Petri nets. The
jobs are rescheduled based on the simulation and reapplication of the
heuristics, until a satisfactory scheduled is attained. At this point, the
scheduled is delivered to the shop ﬂoor. If any disturbance occurs on
the shop ﬂoor, this information is fed back to the system, and the
jobs are rescheduled and simulated again, according to the updated
boundary conditions of the problem. Although presenting a feedback
loop, the system proposed by Li (2011) is not a dynamic model, in the
strict sense, since the scheduling is performed oﬄine and the schedule is optimized for a speciﬁc set of boundary conditions. When these
conditions change, the process is repeated oﬄine for the new set of
A relevant future direction in the application of control theory to
supply chain may be the closer approximation of this theory to the
Operations Research area (Ivanov et al., 2012). In this sense, Ivanov,
Sokolov, and Kaeschel (2010) propose the concept of structure dynamics control, which is based on the combined application of Optimal Control and Mathematical Programming. The structure dynamics
considers different execution scenarios according to different structural states of the supply chain. From one time interval to another,
for example, the transportation and processing rates and the demand
of the regional distribution centers may change. In the proposed approach, the structure dynamics, inventory dynamics and transitions
between intervals are modeled in a dynamic optimal control model.
On the other hand, a discrete optimization problem of smaller dimensionality is formulated for each interval of structural constancy, being
solved by using Mathematical Programming methods. In this way, the
stationary parameters (such as warehouse capacities) are described
in the static model, and the non-stationary parameters (e.g., changing order quantities) are considered in the dynamic control model
The application depicted shows the importance of integrating different areas of knowledge and developing multidisciplinary applications of control theory for the supply chain and manufacturing domains. The model presented in the next sections also point to this
2.1. Representing the dynamics of the shop ﬂoor by analogy with
An analogy with the ideal properties of electrical components is
established by Ferney (2000) to represent the dynamics of the shop
ﬂoor. In order to develop that, the following basic production entities
are deﬁned: machines, intermediate stocks, convergent and divergent
junctions, sources of work and stocks of ﬁnal products. The mathematical formulation of these entities will be detailed in this subsection,
since the model presented in this paper uses them.
By analogy, the machines are represented as resistors, while the
intermediate stocks are modeled as capacitors. The main variables
that have a physical meaning in the model are the production ﬂow
f and the production volume q. The production ﬂow variable represents the evolution of the material ﬂow over a given section of the
manufacturing system, and is measured in material units per time.
Depending on the nature of the studied system, these material units
may represent a discrete or continuous amount of material, or even
a volume or a surface. The production volume is given by the timerelated integration of the production ﬂow, as shown in Eq. (1) (Ferney,
where q0 is a constant value that represents the initial production
volume, f(t) and q(t) are the ﬂow and production volume mentioned
in the previous paragraph and τ is the integration variable (time).
In an ideal resistor, there is a linear relationship between the electrical current f and the voltage e:
where R is the electrical resistance. Since the machines are modeled
as resistors, the following relationship applies to them:
where Ui is the processing frequency of machine i (which is the inverse
of Ri ), fi (t) is the production ﬂow through machine i at time t, and ei
is an effort variable, measured in material units (m.u). According to
Ferney (2000), the effort variable ei does not have a direct physical
meaning, but it reﬂects the dynamic coupling phenomenon in relation
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
to the material availability in the production entity located upstream.
In other words, this variable is important to couple a given machine
to its precedent production entity. All the equations of the model are
expressed in relation to the variables of ﬂow and effort.
The intermediate stocks of the manufacturing system, as mentioned, are modeled as capacitors. Thus, their behavior is mathematically represented by the expression of an ideal capacitor:
where qi is the amount of stored material at time t, Ci is a parameter
related to the storage capacity and ei is the effort variable (as known,
for an ideal capacitor, ei is the voltage, Ci is the capacitance and qi is
The behavior of a stock involves three elementary ﬂows, as in
Eq. (5): an input ﬂow fei (t), an output ﬂow fsi (t), and the difference between them, fi (t), which corresponds to the ﬂow of stored
The amount of material accumulated in the stock, as a function
of the ﬂow fi (t), is given by Eq. (1) previously presented. The amount
of stored material must be non-negative (Eq. (6)), which means that
the material output is controlled in relation to the volume of material
In the model under discussion, it is assumed that the stocks have
inﬁnite capacity, i.e., Ci → . Since qi (t)  0, then from Eq. (4) it follows
that ei (t) → 0. According to Ferney (2000), the stock is a passive
element, i.e., it has no proper dynamics: the incoming material ﬂow
is imposed upon it by the entity connected upstream and the output
ﬂow is withdrawn at the request of the entity located downstream.
Each machine of the manufacturing system is preceded by a correspondent stock; these two entities are connected by means of a
coupling structure to constitute a production station. As the output
effort of the stock tends to zero, as discussed in the previous paragraph, a source of effort is added to establish the coupling interface
between the stock and the machine. This source activates the machine when there is any amount of material in the precedent stock.
The amount of effort added by the source is shown in Eq. (7). This expression guarantees a continuous transition when there is less than
one unit of material in the precedent stock, i.e., it allows the approximation of discrete systems to continuous systems. For more details,
Ferney (2000) should be consulted. When there is at least one unit
of material in stock, then ei (t) = 1 material unit, and the machine
processes the incoming ﬂow with its full processing frequency Ui ,
generating an output ﬂow fsi (t) = Ui material units per time (Eq. (3)).
A schematic of a production station is shown in Fig. 2.
From Eqs. (3), (4) and (7), it is possible to derive the equations for
the stock, the machine and the coupling interface in relation to the
effort and ﬂow variables shown in the schematic. These equations
Fig. 2 shows that a station has two internal junctions. The ﬁrst
one links the stock element into the main ﬂow while the second one
integrates the machine and the source of effort into this main ﬂow.
In the ﬁrst junction, the ﬂow is conserved, as expressed in Eq. (11).
The stock only stores part of the incoming ﬂow, but it cannot create ﬂow. To keep the compatibility of the model, the efforts around
this junction must be equal (Eq. (12)). For the second junction, the
opposite situation applies: the ﬂows around the junction are equal,
and dictated by the machine, while the total effort is conserved, as
expressed in Eqs. (13) and (14). These compatibility equations are
derived from the Bond Graph methodology, which is used by Ferney
(2000) to deﬁne the basic production entities of the shop ﬂoor.
The manipulation of Eqs. (8)–(14) leads to Eq. (15), which expresses the output ﬂow of a station. Supposing that this ith station
is linked to a kth station downstream supplying a kth stock, then the
effort esi is a linear function of the ratio qk /Ck . As both Ci and Ck → 
by deﬁnition, then it is possible to simplify Eq. (15) into Eq. (16).
Finally, the basic state equation for a production station is obtained
by substituting Eqs. (16) and (13) into Eq. (11), as follows:
Besides the station, the junctions, the sources and the wells complete the shop ﬂoor model presented by Ferney (2000). The convergent and divergent junctions enable the representation of the topology of the manufacturing system. The convergent junctions merge the
ﬂows coming from different stations or entities, while the divergent
junctions distribute the material ﬂow into the different stations of the
system. The sources provide the material input ﬂow to the system,
while the wells are similar to stocks with inﬁnite capacity, used to
represent the system outputs, i.e., the stocks of ﬁnal products. The
expressions for a convergent and divergent junctions are presented
According to Eqs. (1) and (5), the ﬂow of stored materials given by
the difference between the input and the output ﬂows, that is:
Fig. 2. Representation of a production station.
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
Machinery available in the plant that manufactures polypropylene woven bags.
fsi and fek represent, respectively, the single output ﬂow and the
different input ﬂows of a convergent junction;
fsj represents each of the output ﬂows of a divergent junction and
fei express the single input ﬂow of this junction;
wj are normalized weights applied to a given output branch of a
This set of production entities is used by Ferney (2000) to model
and simulate a ﬁctitious system with four stations for manufacturing a single product. The control objective of the model is to adjust
the level of the output ﬂow of the system to attend the demand of
the considered product, while, at the same time, keeping the work in
process (WIP) at the desired levels. This objective is achieved by controlling the production frequencies of the machines and the sources,
represented by the variable Ui in Fig. 2. The simulations carried out
showed that the model was able to automatically respond to unexpected events, such as a machine breakdown. In addition, the reference levels set for the intermediate stocks were attained.
The review of the models based on control theory for scheduling and shop ﬂoor control demonstrated that this body of knowledge
is still incipient, fact that encourages further research. In the next
section, a dynamic model for manufacturing multiple products is
Companies that offer customized products in medium scale usually fabricate them in job shops, in an MTO basis. To attend the masscustomization concept mentioned in the introduction of this paper, it
is necessary to associate the ﬂexibility of a job shop with the eﬃciency
of a ﬂow shop. The model presented in this section is applied to the
production of multiple families of customized products in a job shop
conﬁguration. Job shops were also chosen as the target of application because they usually have a complex ﬂow; from the perspective
of the dynamics, this would yield a more interesting analysis. A real
production system of polypropylene bags was modeled. The basic
steps of this speciﬁc production process will be described in the next
paragraphs, before the development of the model.
The process of manufacturing polypropylene woven bags involves
the following operations: extrusion, weaving, lamination, printing,
cutting and stitching. In the extrusion, the polypropylene pellets, additives and pigment are mixed, melted and extruded as a ﬂat ﬁlm.
This ﬁlm is cooled down and slit into the form of tapes, which are
then stretched under heat at a predetermined ratio.
The tapes produced by extrusion are wound on a bobbin that will
feed a circular loom. In the looms, the tapes are woven into tubular
fabric. After that, the fabric goes through different ﬁnishing operations, depending on the customers’ requirements. Some woven bags
are laminated, that is, are coated with a polymer ﬁlm while passing through lamination rolls. Also, the bags (laminated or not) may
require different printings. After printed, the fabric is cut into the desired size and sent for stitching. In the company under analysis, the
stitching operation could be automatically or manually performed. At
the end of the process, the bags that do not go through lamination
may receive a plastic liner in order to avoid leakage of the packed content. This is done in an additional manual operation. Table 1 shows the
number of machines available in the company for each manufacturing
The company under study works in a make-to-order basis, and
its main competitive priorities are on-time delivery (i.e. dependability), product quality, and ﬂexibility to manufacture customized products. The polypropylene bags may present differences regarding linear mass density (denier), resistance and ﬁnishing. About 80 different
products are manufactured in the company, in a job shop conﬁguration. These products can be grouped based on different criteria, such as
type of product, geographical market, process routings, volume range
and others, as highlighted by Hyer and Wemmerlöv (2002). The original classiﬁcation adopted by the company’s managers is based on the
type of product, i.e., the product application. This criterion results in
3. Modeling the dynamics of a real multi-product manufacturing
Class R—Conventional polypropylene bags for animal feed.
Class A—Heavy polypropylene bags for sugar.
This classiﬁcation, however, is not interesting from the perspective
of the dynamics. For the development of the model, the products must
be grouped according to their process routings. Based on that, nine
families of products were identiﬁed, as shown in Table 2.
The historical demand for each product family also constitutes
relevant data for the model. The absolute values of demand were set
as the target values for the outputs of the system, and were also used
to compute the product mix. Table 3 shows these data, for each family
of products. From the mix data, it is possible to derive the relative
amounts of material or work that ﬂow from and to each station. The
process routings determine the topology of the system, while the
mix determines the transition probabilities, which were also used by
Wiendahl and Breithaupt (2000) to model a job shop. The schematic
for the multi-product manufacturing system of propylene bags with
In the schematic, the variables Ui represent the processing frequencies of the machines and the variable U01 refers to frequency of
the source of material ﬂow. Each machine is preceded by an intermediate stock. The ﬂow variables are highlighted in bold. As it can be
seen, the weaving, printing and automatic cutting and stitching departments have multiple machines, in accordance to the data shown
in Table 1. The 12 looms of the weaving department are identical,
therefore, they were considered as one single machine, named machine 2. This approach does not compromise the power of the model
to depict the dynamics of the system. The breakdown of one loom, for
example, may be simulated by imposing a decrement of 1/12 in the
capacity of machine 2. On the other hand, this simpliﬁcation is convenient since it reduces the number of variables, and, therefore, the
complexity of mathematical solution. The two printers and the multiple cutting and stitching machines are not identical; they present
signiﬁcantly different capacities, production speed and speciﬁcations.
The machine 4, for example, is faster than machine 5 and may print in
six different colors, while machine 5 may only print in four different
colors. The cutting and stitching machines also have different features.
For these reasons, these machines were represented separately.
It can be seen that the production ﬂow is somewhat intricate due
to the number of distinct possible routings. In order to represent these
possibilities, one divergent junction and three divergent-convergent
junctions were used, as it can be seen in the schematics.
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
Fig. 3. Schematic of the production system of polypropylene woven bags.
Process routings for each product family.
Historical demand and mix relative to each family of products.
Eqs. (16) and (17) may be applied to each station shown in the
schematics. They are complemented by the expressions for the convergent and divergent junctions, which express the conservation of
ﬂow. The mathematical formulation for the ﬁrst three production
departments and for the junctions 1 and 2 (Fig. 3) is presented as
First, Eq. (20) shows that an initial material ﬂow f01 is imposed to
the system with a frequency U01 , which can be controlled. In order to
establish continuity and compatibility, the input ﬂow of the weaving
station (fe2 ) has to be equivalent to the output ﬂow of the extrusion
(fs1 ), as shown in Eq. (21). Also, the application of Eq. (16) to the ﬁrst
station yields the expression shown in the right side of Eq. (21). The
rate of material stored in the ﬁrst station (Eq. (22)) is given by the
difference between its input and output ﬂows, as previously stated in
The equations employed to model the weaving and lamination
stations are analogous to Eqs. (21) and (22).
f01 = U01 1 meter square per day (primary source of ﬂow)
q1 = f01 − U1 min(1, q1 ) = U01 − U1 min(1, q1 )
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
and the control variables Ui . The matrix form of the state equation is
= 0.8258U3 min(1, q3 ) + 0.4042U2 min(1, q2 )
= 0.0071U3 min(1, q3 ) − 0.00348U2 min(1, q2 )
At the initial moment, if the manufacturing system is empty, the
control matrix is reduced to the part related to the supply source U01 .
As soon as at least one unit of material is stored in each intermediate
stock, the machines become autonomous, i.e., not dependent on the
stock-machine coupling dynamics. Thus, the ﬂow of stored material
q starts to depend just on the processing frequencies Ui . In this case,
the control problem consists of adjusting the processing frequencies
In the permanent regime (i.e. steady state), all the stocks must
contain more than one unit and the level of stored material should
not vary, i.e., q i = 0 for all i. With this deﬁnition, the state equation
= 0.0063U3 min(1, q3 ) + 0.0031U2 min(1, q2 )
= 0.1262U3 min(1, q3 ) + 0.0618U2 min(1, q2 )
= 0.0347(U3 min(1, q3 ) + 0.4900U2 min(1, q2 ))
In the divergent junction between weaving and lamination (junction 1, Fig. 3), part of the ﬂow that leaves the weaving station (fs2 )
goes to lamination (fe3 ), part of it goes to junction 2 (fep ), part leaves
the system in the form of ﬁnal products of family 6 (fsf6 ), and part of
the ﬂow skips the lamination and printing stations, going directly
to the automatic cutting and stitching operations (fec1 ). Thus, Eq.
(19) of a divergent junction is applied to this point, resulting in the
Eq. (19) is also applied to the divergent portion of junction 2, yielding ﬁve distinct output ﬂows: fsf1 , fsf5 , fe6 , f345 and fec2 . Junction 2 has
a convergent portion too; therefore, the weights wj are applied to
the sum of input ﬂows, fs3 + fep . Summarizing, Eqs. (31)–(35) derive
from the application of both Eqs. (18) and (19) to junction 2. Ordinary algebraic manipulation using Eqs. (24), (27), and (29) is also
carried out, resulting in the expressions shown in the right side of
Finally, Eq. (36) represents the output ﬂow that leaves the manual
stitching station and Eq. (37) corresponds to the amount of material
stored in the intermediate stock of this station.
The remaining equations of the model are analogous to the ones
presented. Simple algebraic manipulation of the whole set of equations yields the state equation of the model, in which the ﬂow of stored
material q is a function of the current amount of stored material q
The steady state solution provides the average processing frequency of the machines and sources in the medium term. It signals
which would be the adequate processing frequencies if the system
was not subjected to any kind of disturbances. The linear system
presented in Eq. (39), however, is underdetermined, since it has 11
equations and 12 variables (U1 –U11 plus U01 ). Hence, the deﬁnition
of the adequate frequencies depends on boundary conditions.
One of the most relevant goals of a manufacturing system is to attend the required demands on time. As it can be seen in the schematics, the system being modeled has nine different outputs, each one
corresponding to a product family. In the medium term, the ﬂow in
these outputs must correspond to the respective demands of each
product family, presented in Table 3. This condition generates nine
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
Steady state solution: Processing frequencies of the machines in permanent regime (Uip ).
additional equations analogous to the following equation (see also
fsf 1 = 0.1262U3 min(1, q3 ) + 0.0618U2 min(1, q2 )
With the additional equations, the system becomes overdetermined. Thus, nine different steady state solutions were calculated by
combining Eq. (39) to each one of the additional equations. The solutions found were identical except for small rounding errors. It shows
that the mathematical formulation is consistent, and that some equations of the overdetermined system are linear dependent. Table 4
shows the steady state solution of the system, considering the demands presented in Table 3.
The state equation (Eq. (38)) was implemented in Matlab
the proposed model was simulated using Simulink . The control was
applied to the processing frequency of the machines and of the source
of ﬂow in order to achieve the desired levels of work-in-process (i.e.
intermediate stocks) in the plant. For an exploratory understanding of
the behavior of the system, a proportional controller was applied. The
machines are adjusted to operate with frequencies that are close to
the frequencies of permanent regime shown in Table 4. The controller
increases or decreases these frequencies by amounts that are proportional to the relative error of the stock that immediately succeeds
the machine. If a given machine i is followed by only one subsequent
stock, then the proposed control law is given by:
where Ui is the controlled processing frequency of machine i, Uip is
the processing frequency of machine i in permanent regime, k is the
proportional gain, j is the index of the station downstream of i; e j is
the compensation of the error of stock j (which has the opposite sign
of the error ej ); qj is the current level of stock j and qjc is the reference
For the case where a machine is succeeded by parallel stations,
all the compensations are computed and the minimum of them is
Ui = Uip [1 + min(ke j , ke j+1 , . . . , ke j+m )]
where m + 1 is the number of parallel stations downstream of i.
The remaining variables and parameters are deﬁned as in Eqs. (41)
An exploratory simulation was performed with the controller deﬁned by Eqs. (41)–(43). The results are shown in the next section. The
simulation was carried out in a personal computer with the following
processor CoreTM i7-3620M CPU @ 2.90 gigaspeciﬁcations: Intel
hertz, 6 gigabytes of RAM and operational system of 64 bits. Matlab
release 2012b and Simulink version 8.0 (R2012b) were used.
Fig. 4 shows the results of the simulation performed with the
proportional controller deﬁned in Section 3.2, with gain k = 0,1. The
reference levels for the intermediate stocks were deﬁned as a hundred
Fig. 4. Results of the simulation of the proposed model with a proportional controller.
times the values observed for the open loop system. The transient
regime response of the system starting with null initial stocks was
It can be seen that a surplus of material is manufactured at the
beginning of the simulation, when the machines are operating with
a frequency above the frequency of permanent regime. However, the
proportional controller compensates this surplus, so that the intermediate stocks could reach the desired level with relative low error.
This result showed that the behavior of the system was automatically
adjusted during the transient regime in order to achieve the predetermined levels of work in process. Therefore, the proposed model
could successfully represent the system dynamics, and this dynamics
Fig. 4 shows that the system needs approximately 240 days to
reach stability, which may be considered a too long time from the
management perspective. Nonetheless, it must be highlighted that
the average aggregate demands are being attended during the transient regime, since the products of the different families are continuously manufactured at frequencies that are close to the frequency
of the machines in permanent regime. These latter frequencies, on
their turn, were set to simultaneously attend the demands for the
Additionally, it is possible to observe that the implemented feedback control loop is equivalent to a pulled system, such as the kanban
system, for instance. In this case, the information ﬂow is opposite to
the material ﬂow, i.e. the information ﬂows upstream. Fig. 4 shows
that the stocks that are closer to the outputs of the system, i.e. stocks
6 to 11, tend to reach stability before the remaining ones. They are
followed by stocks 4 and 5, then by stocks 3, 2 and 1, respectively.
Stock 1 is the last one to reach the reference value. Thus, it is possible
to see that the system has an intrinsic inertia, i.e., there is a delay in
the transmission of information, from the time it is sent to the machines of the end of the system until the time it reaches the machines
One advantage of the developed model resides in the possibility of
representing the process routings of all the different product families
in a uniﬁed map. In this sense, it differs from other methods, such as
the Value Stream Mapping (VSM), where one different map has to be
generated for each process routing. This uniﬁed model enables the
direct computation of the workload of the stations to manufacture
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
all the range of products in the job shop. The processing frequencies
of the machines in permanent regime are well-grounded estimates
of this workload. As known, the Workload Control (WLC) is an inﬂuential factor in the performance of MTO companies with job shop
The proposed model also requires a set of data that is relatively
easy to collect, in comparison to more complex models, such as the
one proposed by Wiendahl and Breithaupt (1999, 2000), which require a large amount and variety of data. Another interesting point is
that the modeling approach chosen is able to represent the interdependencies among the stations. The dynamic coupling between two
consecutive stations is stated by the compatibility equations that express the conservation of ﬂow in the junctions. These equations play
the same role as the capacity control couplings added as inputs to the
local control loop in the model proposed by Kim and Duﬃe (2006).
The information about the demand of the products is an explicit
parameter of the proposed state model, used to deﬁne the steady state
processing frequency of the machines. In other models developed for
a similar application (Kim & Duﬃe, 2006; Wiendahl & Breithaupt,
2000), this demand information is implicit in the amount of input
orders that arrive at each workstation. The proposed model with explicit demand information might be able to cope with seasonal patterns, provided that the average demand for each family of products
As seen in the proposed model, the control of the manufacturing
system is performed by adjusting the processing frequencies of the
machines. However, for the production of different products, speciﬁc
operating times are required, i.e., the processing frequency of the
machine cannot be set to any desired value. Thus, the intent is not
to use the results of simulation to physically control the production
frequencies of the machines. Based on these results, however, the
managers may adjust the downtimes of the machines to reach a reference production frequency, on average, in order to keep the levels
of work in process under control. In fact, the proposed mathematical
formulation allows performing two managerial analyses: a static and
a dynamic capacity analysis. The steady state processing frequencies
of the machines express the average load of the machines, for the
production mix considered in the model. Thus, managers may compare these loads to the availability of the machines in order to identify
static bottlenecks in the system. On the other hand, the system can be
simulated in the presence of disturbances and changes in the average
demands in order to observe how the capacity requirements change,
i.e., to observe the bottlenecks in a dynamical context. A similar analysis can be carried out with the introduction of machine breakdowns.
In this case, it is possible to ﬁnd good policies to adjust the processing
frequency of the other machines and to adjust the source of ﬂow (i.e.
the release of jobs in the shop ﬂoor) in order to avoid deregulated WIP
and to attend at least part of the demand. Summarizing, the simulations of the proposed model may provide managerial recommendations on how to dynamically operate the shop ﬂoor, depending on its
current state and on the events that occur. Different automatic control
strategies may be implemented, therefore, a relevant practical deliver
of this research is allowing a dynamic analysis of a manufacturing system that does not exclusively depend on the previous knowledge and
The presented model may be applied to manufacturing systems
with different conﬁgurations, such as parallel machines or ﬂow shops,
since these systems are composed of the same basic entities used in
the presented example: machines, intermediate stocks, ﬁnal stocks
(wells), sources of ﬂow and junctions. For instance, in a ﬂow shop
without parallel machines, the ﬂow will be unidirectional, i.e., there
will not exist any divergent or convergent junction in any section
of the system, except in its end, where a divergent junction will
deﬁne the product mix, i.e. the percentages of ﬂow that are needed to
attend the demand of each product family. In a ﬂow shop with parallel
machines, divergent and convergent junctions will exist before and
after the parallel stations, respectively, but none of the products will
It is worth mentioning that the mathematical representation of
different models does not depend on the formulation of a different
transfer function for each particular workstation or for each particular
system. The mathematical model of the entity “station” is generic and
the approach is modular, i.e. the representation of different systems
only requires different combinations of the basic entities to form
different topologies. The approach may also be applied to MTO or MTS
manufacturing systems. In both cases, the average demand data for a
given period is needed, not mattering whether this data corresponds
One limitation for the generalization of the model is the selection
of the controller type and the tuning of its parameters, since for each
particular manufacturing system, a different type of controller with
speciﬁc values of parameters would provide the best results. Thus,
the control synthesis for different manufacturing systems is still an
In the presented example, the demands for the products were expressed in units of area per time instead of in a discrete unit. However,
the use of a continuous measuring unit is not a requirement for the
application of the model, because the term min(1,qi ) allows the approximation of discrete systems by a continuous systems, as stated by
Ferney (2000). This term expresses the transient coupling between a
given machine and its precedent stock when less than one unit of material is stored in this stock, assuring a smooth transition. Conversely,
when the stock located upstream a given machine is not supplied any
longer, the volume of material stored tends asymptotically to zero
according to the processing frequency of the downstream machine.
Thus, the expression allows the asymptotic convergence (Alla & David,
1988; Ferney, 2000). In practical terms, it means that discrete units,
such as material units or orders may be employed in this approach,
and they do not constitute an obstacle for the model generalization.
The main limitation of the proposed model regards the level of
analysis it is suitable for. Instead of dealing with individual orders,
it employs average variables, such as mean work in process, average
product mix and average demand rates for different product families.
In this sense, the model focus on the “planning level” of Production
Planning and Control (PPC), likewise the ﬂow models presented by
Wiendahl and Breithaupt (1999, 2000) and Kim and Duﬃe (2006). It
would be of interest that this kind of model could deal more directly
with the operational/scheduling level, considering individual orders
This paper presented the development of a model that depicts the
dynamics of a multi-product manufacturing system. The model was
based on analogies between the production entities of the shop ﬂoor
and ideal properties of electrical components. The state equation of
the system was derived from these analogies and from the application
of the dynamic modeling methodology. The state representation enables the implementation of a feedback control loop to automatically
In the proposed model, the control objective was to achieve the desired levels of work in process while simultaneously attending the aggregate demand of each product family manufactured in the plant. An
exploratory simulation of the system with a proportional controller
results showed that each intermediate stock presented an initial overshoot but, after that, stabilized around the deﬁned reference levels.
It demonstrates that the system can be successfully controlled when
starting from the initial condition set. Also, the results of simulation
reveal that the system has an inherent inertia, that is, the control information ﬂows upstream with a certain delay, from a given station
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
Most of the ordinary tools applied in the manufacturing area presume stationary conditions. Some exceptions are the queuing theory
and the discrete events simulation. The proposed methodology has
an advantage over these tools since it allows not only to study the
response of the system in a dynamic sense, but also to control it over
time to reach a desired condition or state. In the conventional simulation (i.e., Discrete Events Simulation), this automatic feedback does
not exist. In addition, this modeling methodology provides the opportunity to exploit the conventional tools of control theory to, in future
research, tackle the problems of control synthesis for the speciﬁc case
of manufacturing systems. In this sense, this research has a multidisciplinary perspective, since the ﬁeld of manufacturing management
can beneﬁt from the tools and techniques that come from control
theory and dynamic systems modeling, which are originally applied
to physical systems (mechanical, electrical, hydraulic and thermal).
Actually, some recent reviews showed that control theory has been
largely applied to model supply chain systems over the past 40 years.
However, the extant dynamic models devoted to depict the shop ﬂoor
dynamics, in the plant level, seem to be much less numerous than the
dynamic models for supply chain representation or lot size optimization. The proposed model intends to be a contribution to this speciﬁc
As presented in Section 2, a dynamic model of a manufacturing
system based on analogies with electrical components had previously
been developed for the case of a single product system. Thus, this research contributes with the extension of this modeling methodology
to multi-product systems and with the report of a practical application. It overcomes one usual limitation of the dynamic productioninventory models and supply chain models, which is the assumption
of a single product. The importance of overcoming this limitation is
highlighted in the literature of the ﬁeld, as discussed in the introduction of this paper. The modeling approach presented is an alternative
to the approaches used to develop the few existing models devoted
This paper focused on the development of the dynamic model
itself, i.e., on the details of the modeling process. The simulation performed was exploratory/preliminary, and aimed to validate the capability of the model to represent the dynamics of the manufacturing
system. The development of this model gives room to future research
concerning the modeling and simulation of diverse manufacturing
systems in a variety of scenarios considering unexpected events, such
as machine breakdowns, lack of materials, urgent orders, among others. The methodology allows modeling several conﬁgurations of manufacturing systems, such as single machine, parallel machines, ﬂow
shop, job shop, batch shop and open shop. This generalization capability is provided mainly by the modularity of the presented approach.
The basic manufacturing entities, each one associated to its respective constitutive equation, may be arranged to represent different
shop ﬂoor conﬁgurations. Then, the resulting state model will be a
combination of the expressions that represent the involved entities.
This modeling approach may be also applied to variables and parameters measured by continuous and discrete units, which confers more
Besides the exploration of different scenarios, the design and tuning of effective controllers for the manufacturing systems constitutes
another relevant opportunity for future research.
The main limitation of the presented model concerns the considered level of analysis. The model deals with average variables, providing managers with prescriptive actions to control the manufacturing
system in a higher level of the PPC hierarchy, not in the operational
level. The model is not able to dynamically come up with the scheduling of individual jobs, however, it could be extended to contemplate
a higher level of detail, by incorporating parameters such as ﬁxed
machine utilization rates, machine setup times and blocking times,
waiting times between operations etc. Moreover, the application of
the proposed methodology to scheduling problems, where the main
variables are individual jobs, processing times and due dates, seem to
be a challenging opportunity for future work.
The authors would like to thank the three anonymous referees for
their valuable comments and suggestions. The second author would
also like to thank CNPq (Brazilian National Council for Scientiﬁc and
Technological Development) for partially supporting this research
(grants 476753/2011-2 and 303000/2010-4).
Alla, H., & David, R. (1988). Modelling of production systems by continuous Petri nets.
In 3rd international conference on CAD/CAM, CARS & FOF88 (pp. 344–348). Detroit,
Arda, Y., & Hennet, J. C. (2006). Inventory control in a multi-supplier system. International Journal of Production Economics, 104, 249–259.
Axsäter, S. (1976). Coordinating control of production-inventory systems. International
Journal of Production Research, 14, 669–688.
Axsäter, S. (1985). Control theory concepts in production and inventory control. International Journal of Systems Science, 16, 161–169.
Axsäter, S. (2001). Scaling down multi-echelon inventory problems. International Journal of Production Economics, 71, 255–261.
Axsäter, S. (2003). Approximate optimization of a two-level distribution inventory
system. International Journal of Production Economics, 81-82, 545–553.
Axsater, S., Olsson, F., & Tydesjo, P. (2007). Heuristics for handling direct upstream
demand in two-echelon distribution inventory systems. International Journal of
Barrena, E., Canca, D., Coelho, L. C., & Laporte, G. (2014). Exact formulations and algorithm for the train timetabling problem with dynamic demand. Computers and
Bensoussan, A., Çakanyıldırım, M., & Sethi, S. P. (2007). Optimal ordering policies for
inventory problems with dynamic information delays. Production & Operations
Bertsekas, D. P. (2000). Dynamic programming and optimal control. Belmont, MA:
Bogataj, L., & Horvat, L. (1996). Stochastic considerations of Grubbström-Molinder
model of MRP, input-output and multi-echelon inventory systems. International
Journal of Production Economics, 45, 329–336.
Burns, J. F., & Sivazlian, B. D. (1978). Dynamic analysis of multi-echelon supply systems.
Computers and Industrial Engineering, 2, 181–193.
Chiang, T. -C., Cheng, H. -C., & Fu, L. -C. (2010). A memetic algorithm for minimizing
total weighted tardiness on parallel batch machines with incompatible job families
and dynamic job arrival. Computers and Operations Research, 37, 2257–2269.
Cho, S., & Erkoc, M. (2009). Design of predictable production scheduling model using
control theoretic approach. International Journal of Production Research, 47, 2975–
Dejonckheere, J., Disney, S. M., Lambrecht, M. R., & Towill, D. R. (2002). Transfer function
analysis of forecasting induced bullwhip in supply chains. International Journal of
Daganzo, C. F. (2004). On the stability of supply chains. Operations Research, 52,
Dejonckheere, J., Disney, S. M., Lambrecht, M. R., & Towill, D. R. (2003). Measuring
and avoiding the bullwhip effect: A control theoretic approach. European Journal of
Dejonckheere, J., Disney, S. M., Lambrecht, M. R., & Towill, D. R. (2004). The impact of
information enrichment on the Bullwhip effect in supply chains: A control engineering perspective. European Journal of Operational Research, 153, 727–750.
Disney, S. M., Naim, M. M., & Towill, D. R. (2000). Genetic algorithm optimization of
a class of inventory control systems. International Journal of Production Economics,
Evans, G. N., Naim, M. M., & Towill, D. R. (1998). Application of a simulation methodology
to the redesign of a logistical control system. International Journal of Production
Ferney, M. (2000). Modelling and Controlling product manufacturing systems using
bond-graphs and state equations: Continuous systems and discrete systems which
can be represented by continuous models. Production Planning & Control, 11, 7–19.
Forrester, J. (1961). Industrial dynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grubbström, R. W. (2005). Algorithms for optimal dynamic lotsizing in discrete and
continuous time. International Journal of Agile Manufacturing, 8, 85–96.
Grubbström, R. W., Bogataj, M., & Bogataj, L. (2010). Optimal lotsizing within MRP
theory. Annual Reviews in Control, 34, 89–100.
Grubbström, R. W., & Molinder, A. (1996). Safety production plans in MRP-systems
using transform methodology. International Journal of Production Economics, 46-47,
Grubbström, R. W., & Ovrin, P. (1992). Intertemporal generalization of the relationship
between material requirements planning and input–output analysis. International
Journal of Production Economics, 26, 311–318.
Grubbström, R. W., & Tang, O. (2000). An overview of input–output analysis applied to
production-inventory systems. Economic Systems Review, 12, 3–25.
J. K. Sagawa, M. S. Nagano / European Journal of Operational Research 244 (2015) 624–636
He, X., Prasad, A., & Sethi, S. P. (2009). Cooperative advertising and pricing in a dynamic
stochastic supply chain: Feedback stackelberg strategies. Production & Operations
Hennet, J. C. (2009). A globally optimal local inventory control policy for multistage
supply chains. International Journal of Production Research Special Issue “Cutting
Edge of the French Community in Production Research”, 47, 435–453.
Hyer, N., & Wemmerlöv, U. (2002). Reorganizing the factory. New York: Productivity
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2012). Applicability of optimal control theory
to adaptive supply chain planning and scheduling. Annual Reviews in Control, 36,
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2013). Control and system-theoretic identiﬁcation of the supply chain dynamics domain for planning, analysis and adaptation of performance
under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research, 224, 313–323.
Ivanov, D., Sokolov, B., & Kaeschel, J. (2010). A multi-structural framework for adaptive
supply chain planning and operations control with structure dynamics considerations. European Journal of Operational Research, 200, 409–420.
Jang, W. (2002). Dynamic scheduling of stochastic jobs on a single machine. European
Journal of Operational Research, 138, 518–530.
Jitapaiboon, T., Dobrzykowski, D. D., Ragu-Nathan, T. S., & Vonderembse, M. A. (2013).
Unpacking IT use and integration for mass customisation: A service-dominant logic
view. International Journal of Production Research, 51, 2527–2547.
Khmelnitsky, E., Kogan, K., & Maimon, O. (1997). Maximum principle-based methods
for production scheduling with partially sequence-dependent setups. International
Journal of Production Research, 35, 2701–2712.
Kim, J. H., & Duﬃe, N. A. (2005). Design and analysis of closed-loop capacity control for a
multi-workstation production system. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Technology, 54,
Kim, J. H., & Duﬃe, N. A. (2006). Performance of coupled closed-loop capacity controls
in a multi-workstation production system. CIRP Annals—Manufacturing Technology,
Kogan, K., & Herbon, A. (2008). A supply chain under limited-time promotion: The effect
of customer sensitivity. European Journal of Operational Research, 188, 273–292.
Li, W. e. a. (2011). A heuristic for adaptive production scheduling and control in ﬂow
shop production. International Journal of Production Research, 49, 3151–3170.
Liao, X., Wang, L. Q., & Yu, P. (2007). Stability of dynamical systems. Amsterdam:
Liu, G., Shah, R., & Schroeder, R. G. (2012). The relationships among functional integration, mass customisation, and ﬁrm performance. International Journal of Production
Nabais, J. L., Negenborn, R., Carmona Benitez, R. B., & Botto, M. A. (2013). A Multi-Agent
MPC scheme for vertically integrated manufacturing supply chains. In 6th IFAC
conference on management and control of production and logistics: vol. 6 (pp. 56–
Ortega, M., & Lin, L. (2004). Control theory applications to the production-inventory
problem: A review. International Journal of Production Research, 42, 2303–2322.
Piller, T. F., Moeslein, K., & Stotko, C. M. (2004). Does mass customization pay? An economic approach to evaluate customer integration. Production Planning and Control,
Pontryagin, L. S., Boltyanskii, V. G., Gamkrelidze, R. V., & Mishchenko, E. F. (1964). The
Mathematical theory of optimal processes. London: Pergamon Press.
Prabhu, V. V., & Duﬃe, N. A. (1999). Nonlinear dynamics in distributed arrival time control of heterarchical manufacturing systems. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems
Proth, J. -M. (2007). Scheduling: New trends in industrial environment. Annual Reviews
Sagawa, J. K., & Nagano, M. S. (2013). Dynamic models for production control and
scheduling: A brief review. In 12th Mexican international conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence (MICAI) (pp. 38–44). Mexico City, Mexico: IEEE.
Sarimveis, H., Patrinos, P., Tarantilis, C., & Kiranoudis, C. T. (2008). Dynamic modeling
and control of supply chain systems: A review. Computers and Operations Research,
Simon, H. A. (1952). On the application of servomechanism theory in the study of
production control. Econometrica, 20, 247–268.
Sipper, D., & Bulﬁn, R. L. (1997). Production: Planning, control and integration. New
Suri, R., & Desiraju, R. (1997). Performance analysis of ﬂexible manufacturing systems
with a single discrete material-handling device. International Journal of Flexible
Towill, D. R. (1982). Dynamic analysis of an inventory and order based production
control system. International Journal of Production Research, 20, 671–687.
Vassian, J. H. (1955). Application of discrete variable servo theory to inventory control.
Wang, C. -S., & Uzsoy, R. (2002). A genetic algorithm to minimize maximum lateness on
a batch processing machine. Computers and Operations Research, 29, 1621–1640.
Wang, X., Liu, Z., Zheng, C., & Wu, J. (2008). Analysis and design of a production and
inventory control system for ramp demand. In WiCOM ’08—4th international conference on wireless communications, networking and mobile computing (pp. 1–5).
Weng, W., & Fujimura, S. (2012). Control methods for dynamic time-based manufacturing under customized product lead times. European Journal of Operational Research,
Weng, W., Wei, X., & Fujimura, S. (2012). Dynamic routing strategies for JIT production
in hybrid ﬂow shops. Computers and Operations Research, 39, 3316–3324.
Wiendahl, H. -P. (1995). Load-orientated manufacturing control. New York: Springer.
Wiendahl, H. -P., & Breithaupt, J. -W. (1997). Production planning and control on the
basis of control theory. In N. Okino, H. Tamura, & S. Fujii (Eds.), Advances in
production management systems—Perspectives and future challenges (pp. 351–362).
Wiendahl, H. -P., & Breithaupt, J. -W. (1999). Modelling and controlling the dynamics
of production systems. Production Planning and Control, 10, 389–401.
Wiendahl, H. -P., & Breithaupt, J. -W. (2000). Automatic production control applying
control theory. International Journal of Production Economics, 63, 33–46.
Wikner, J., Naim, M. M., & Towill, D. R. (1992). The system simpliﬁcation approach in
understanding the dynamic behaviour of a manufacturing supply chain. Journal of
Zhou, L., Disney, S., & Towill, D. R. (2010). A pragmatic approach to the design of
bullwhip controllers. International Journal of Production Economics, 128, 556–568.
