3.2. Simulation model (see Puergstaller 2009)
The simulation model is a scaled down model of an Austrian optical storage media
producer (for a description of the real factory see Section 4.4.1) and consists of nine
individual machines that are non-exchangeable (see Figure 9).
Figure 9. Production system - simulation model
The system produces 24 products following the routings depicted in Table 6 (column 2 to
4). The data of the products are based on the practical case. As in the practical case, there
are no sequence-dependent setup times and no flexibility in the capacities since the real
factory runs 24 hours a day and seven days a week. A planning period is a day, and the
average operation times are approximately 42, 66 and 53 minutes in stages 1, 2 and 3
respectively (see columns 5 to 7 in Table 6). The first-come-first-served dispatching rule is
Table 6. Routings and operation times in minutes for all product of the simulation model
The production in the simulation model is driven by customer orders since the real
manufacturer follows a make-to-order approach. The interval between arrival date and
required due date of an order determines the possible release times. The order arrival model
is formulated as follows: The arrival date is generated as the required due date minus the
quoted delivery time. The required due date is based on the demand which specifies the
number of orders to be delivered at the end of the respective period and the quoted delivery
time is a random variable whose distribution is taken from empirical data (see Puergstaller
2009, p.67ff.). Order release is performed at the beginning of each period in a rolling
horizon setting as depicted in Figure 10.
Figure 10. Rolling horizon planning as part of the simulation study (following
At the beginning of the simulation the total demand is generated (see next Section 3.2.2).
At the first period of the planning horizon, which is set to seven periods in our study,
demand forecasts are made and the order releases are determined by the two LP models (see
Section 3.1). Note that we do not analyze the influence of demand predictability on the
performance of the two order release models (as in Puergstaller, Missbauer 2012). Thus, we
do not consider forecast errors in our study which is a topic for future research (see
Stampfer et al. 2014). Thereafter, the planned orders are released at the beginning of the
period and at the end of the period the model collects data for the next period.
Given the above stated hypotheses we have five different experimental factors that we
need to take into consideration. We have the two different optimization based order release
models, the IOC model and the ACF model that we want to compare. With regard to
hypothesis H1 (and H3) that the ACF model outperforms the IOC model as the variation of
the total demand increases we differentiate between constant and seasonal demand
scenarios. In order to analyze hypotheses H2 and H3 we analyze the influence of a constant
or variable product mix on the performance of the two order release models. Finally, to test
hypothesis H4a and H4b we include two further factors. Firstly, we test two different period
lengths and test three different utilization levels. The comparison will be made by applying
the safety stock adjustment procedure which makes the two models comparable on a single
performance measure (see Section 3.3). In our study this measure is the resulting total
inventory level, consisting of the held WIP in front of the machines and the finished goods
In total we use five experimental factors: Total demand and product mix variability,
order release method, period length and average bottleneck utilizations which will be
described in detail in the following paragraphs.
Total demand- and product mix variability:
The system faces fluctuating demand which is represented by a sinusoidal demand in the
simulation model, following the notation given in Table 7. The demand was generated in
two steps (Steele at al. 1995). In Step 1 the total demand for each planning period was
Because the total demand is defined as “total demand during a period”, different mean
demand, amplitudes and cycle length values were used for different period lengths to obtain
the desired utilization levels (see below). For example, when period length is 960 minutes
the total mean demand during a period is me=55 units, the amplitude in the case of varying
demand is a=44 units and the cycle length c=89 periods.
Step 2 of the demand generation procedure (Steele at al. 1995) gives us the product mix
variability. Therefore, the demand for the individual products is calculated from the total
demand (32) multiplied by the proportions (35), which are stated as normally distributed
(33) and standardized (34) (for the used symbols see Table 7).
The demand is rounded to integer values. The means and standard deviations of the
products are given in Table 8 (see Puergstaller 2009, p. 69).
Percentage of the total demand that is allocated to product j in period t
Adjusted percentage of the total demand, that is allocated to product j in period t
Amplitude of the seasonal part of the total demand (number of orders)
Cycle length of the seasonal part of the total demand (periods)
Constant part of the total demand (number of orders)
µ jp σ jp Mean and standard deviation of the normally distributed percentage of the total demand that
Table 7. Definition of the symbols used in the demand and order arrival model
Table 8. Mean and standard deviation of the normally distributed percentage of the total demand
Note that due to the rounding of the demand for the individual products to integers we do
not always obtain nonzero demands for all 24 products. In the case of constant demand and
constant product mix we obtain demands for 16 and for variable demand and constant
product mix we get orders for 19 products. For both cases with varying product mix we
have a demand for all 24 products over time.
