A neural reinforcement learning approach to learn local dispatching
policies i n p r o d u c t i o n scheduling
C o m p u t e r Science D e p a r t m e n t
Finding optimal solutions for j o b shop scheduling problems requires high computational effort, especially under consideration of uncertainty and frequent replanning. In contrast to
computational solutions, domain experts are
often able to derive good local dispatching
heuristics by looking at typical problem i n stances. They can be efficiently applied by
these rules are usually not optimal, especially in
complex decision situations. Here we describe
an approach that tries to combine both worlds.
A neural network based agent autonomously
optimizes its local dispatching policy w i t h respect to a global optimization goal, defined for
the overall plant. On two benchmark scheduling problems, we show both learning and generalization abilities of the proposed approach.
Production scheduling is the allocation of limited resources to tasks over time, while one or
more objectives have to be optimized. Many
variants of the basic problem formulation exist, and most of them are NP-hard to solve
[Pinedo, 1994], meaning that exact solution algorithms suffer from a non-polynomial increase
of computation time. This constitutes a problem not only if the problem to solve surmounts
a certain size, but also in moderately complex
domains, where the occurrence of new or unexpected events - the arrival of new jobs or
the breakdown of machines - makes frequent
replanning necessary. Even more, technological changes like semiconductor fabrication or
thin film production are posing additional challenges, since new problem structures - like conditional loops in the production process - occur,
for which conventional optimization techniques
An alternative and far less time-consuming way
is the application of simple heuristic dispatch-
ing rules that select the j o b to process next on
an idle resource depending on the current situation. However, these dispatching rules only reflect heuristic knowledge and do not guarantee
to lead to the optimal behaviour of the overall
system. Even for experienced human experts it
may become arbitrarily difficult to decide which
dispatching rule to apply and how to time it
in a certain scenario, since the effects on the
dynamics of the overall system can hardly be
Here we propose an alternative way that allows
to combine the desire for (nearly) optimal solutions w i t h a time-efficient computation, provided by resource-coupled dispatching rules.
The idea is to have learning agents, that are associated to each resource and determine the local dispatching policy. This policy is not fixed,
but instead is autonomously learned by getting
feedback of the overall dynamic behaviour of
the production system. In contrast to common
dispatching rules which typically only consider
few characteristic features of the current situation to make the decision, a learning agent can
deal w i t h more state information and therefore
figure out more sophisticated policies, which
are better tailored to the process. The appearance of the proposed training method does not
depend on the optimization goal or constraints
posed by the production process. Therefore,
it is applicable to a wide range of problem i n stances. As an example, in this article we focus
on job shop scheduling problems w i t h the goal
to reduce the summed tardiness. The following summarizes the main characteristics of the
(approximately) optimal dispatching policies (including the adaptation to the plant
structure and the inherent consideration of
• fast situation dependent decision making,
Recently, several reinforcement learning approaches have been proposed to solve certain
aspects of scheduling problems. They vary in
the type and their view of the scheduling problem and - as a consequence - the type of control decisions. Zhang and Dietterich [Dietterich
and Zhang, 1995] propose an RL approach that
learns a neural value-function to guide a repairbased scheduler. An action in this approach
is the decision for a certain repair operation.
Schneider, Boyan and Moore [Schneider et al.,
1998] present a value-function-based approach
for the problem of demand based scheduling.
The learning scheduler decides over a set of
possible factory configurations to maximize expected production profit in the presence of
varying demand curves. In contrast to these
global approaches, a local multi-agent view of
a production scheduling problem is taken in
[Brauer and Weiss, 1998]. Each machine does
make a local decision which job to process next
based on the estimated completion time of the
candidate jobs. The learning rule is based on
the propagation of these estimates along the
production line of a j o b , similar to the QRouting algorithm [Boyan and L i t t m a n , 1994].
An application of average-reward RL is presented by Mahadevan and Theocharous [Mahadevan and Theocharous, 1998] for the control
Our approach follows the idea of local decision
making. The neural network based agent considers the current situation, represented by a
set of relevant (local) features, to make its decision which job to process next. It learns a
local decision policy (similar to heuristic dispatching rules) w i t h the ability to adapt to the
user-defined optimization goal. This is done
autonomously, meaning that the policy is selfimproved by repeating a certain number of typical training cases.
The task considered in the following is to process a set of m jobs on the n resources of a factory. Each j o b j
basic operation must be performed on a certain
1... .n and has a certain processing time. A job is finished after completion of
its last operation. If the completion time
job j is larger than a certain due-date , then
the j o b is said to be tardy. The tardiness
a job is zero, if it is finished before or at its duedate; otherwise it is
scheduling objectives to be optimized all relate
to the completion time of the jobs. Various
variants of the basic optimization problem exist which can be classified within a complexity
hierarchy [Pinedo, 1994]. In the following, we
look at the problem of minimizing the summed
deterministic problem subsumizes also the total
completion time problem as well as the maximum lateness or maximum makespan problems. Being NP-hard, it is not possible to solve
this problem with a polynomial time algorithm.
D e s c r i p t i o n of t h e s o l u t i o n
2.1 O p t i m i z a t i o n p r o b l e m a n d
The global production scheduling problem can
be described as a Markov Decision Process
(MDP): the system's state s(t) is described by
the current situation of the n resources and the
processing state of the TO jobs, a decision a(t)
describes which job is processed next on a waiting resource. The goal of scheduling is to find
R(s, a, t) accumulated over time are minimized
job is finished. Costs R(s,a,t) may depend
both on the current situation and on the selected decision and express the desired optimization goal. For example, costs may arise
due to the tardiness of a job, due to a resource
waiting idle, or due to costs caused by the need
to change a tool before continuing processing,
In our approach, the global decision a(t) is a
made by distributed agents each associated with one of the
n resources. If a resource is ready to process a
new operation, then its agent chooses one job
out of a set Ak of jobs, where Ak is the set
of jobs for which the next operation Oji must
be processed on resource k. The resource is
then occupied for the duration of Oji. After
Each agent makes its decision based on a local
of the global plant situation at time t. s k represents the local view
of the agent. It can be thought of compressing the huge amount of global state information into features that are relevant for making
the local decision at resource k. Learning here
means iteratively improving the decision policy
w i t h respect to the optimization of the global
costs (1). This is done by a Q-learning related
learning-rule adapted to the local decision process:
The learning rule relates the local decision process as experienced by agent k to the global optimization goal by considering the global direct
costs R(.). Since the time between the decisions
varies depending on the duration of the currently processed operation, the 'reinforcement
converges, then the optimal local value function
predicts the estimated accumulated global costs, if in situation
will choose that j o b next, that will lead to an
optimization of the performance of the overall
plant. The policy of the agent is determined by
Since it is our objective to minimize the
summed tardiness of all jobs, we have to choose
R(,) such, that the minimization of (1) is equivalent to the minimization of the tardiness T.
is to compute the tardiness after the j o b is finished
The second possibility is to have costs in each
time step during processing, if the job is currently too late but not ready yet:
Although both formulations are equivalent w i t h
respect to the general problem formulation, the
latter choice has the advantage, that the cost
function directly reflects the tardiness when it
actually occurs, which may help the learning
system. Therefore it is used in the experiments
During learning, a random exploration strategy
is performed that deviates from time to time
The agent's learning rule varies from the Qlearning assumptions in two important issues:
a) no central global decision is made, but i n stead, the global decision is composed by individual decisions of time-varying policies. Unless all policies are stable, this makes the process seen by the local agent non-stationary (in
contrast, a single Q-learning agent assumes to
experience a stationary environment), b) an
agent does only use compressed information
of the complete state. W i t h an agent's local state information, the observed system behaviour may become stochastic or even unpredictable. However, there is empirical evidence
that Q-learning works in this scenario [Barto
and Crites, 1996]. In the experiments in section 3 the problems mentioned in a) are circumvented, since in this paper only situations
w i t h a single local learning agent are examined.
We choose a multilayer-perceptron neural network for representing the value function Q(.)
for two reasons: a) the state space is continuous
and therefore no finite scheme (like a lookuptable) can represent all states, b) we want to
exploit the generalization ability of the neural
network to find general policies, i.e. the Q function should generalize to unknown situations.
Input for the function approximator is an adequate description of the current decision situation by a feature vector. The features have to
comply w i t h the following requirements: They
should relate to the future expected costs and
should be characteristic for the present situation. Features should represent characteristics
of typical problem classes rather than of individual instances, such that the acquired knowledge can be generalized to new problem i n stances. For this reason, few attributes are
considered, mainly describing the local situation at the machine. W i t h respect to practical applicability, features should be computable
out of data available from common commercial
PPC-systems. In order to keep the network
input small, redundant information should be
avoided. Dealing w i t h a time-dependent problem, besides static properties dynamic features
should be concerned. They are not only dependent on the job or resource properties (e.g.
processing time) but also on time progress (e.g.
slack). Input to the neural network are local state features Sk(t) plus features coding the
• describing general characteristics of the
problem: 'tightness' r (1) and 'distribut i o n ' R (2) of the jobs w i t h respect to their
• describing the current situation: estimated
tardiness, estimated makespan C (3), average slack
decision f e a t u r e s / j o b characteristics:
• describing characteristics of job j with respect to the present situation in Ak'. e.g.
due date index (EDD) (4), relative slack,
slack index (MS) (5), relative waiting time
(FIFO) (6), relative processing time, processing time index (SPT, L P T )
i.e. the properties of the remaining operations if job j was selected: e.g. average
• describing the relationship j o b / operation,
i.e. the significance of operation o ij for job
j: e.g. relative work in process, relative
The following experiments show the behaviour
of the proposed learning approach in comparison to heuristic dispatching rules. In detail, we
• how does the choice of input features influence the optimality of the policy found
• is the learned policy general, i.e. does the
policy show good performance when applied to untrained situations?
• does the proposed learning scheme work,
i.e. is it possible to improve the decision
policy of the local learning agent with respect to the global goal autonomously?
• how does the learned policy perform compared to heuristic dispatching rules?
We examine two cases: a single resource case,
as a demonstration for the principle working
and performance capabilities, and a multi resource case, to show the capability of the agent
to work within a multi-agent scenario. In both
cases, 10 different production scenarios are used
during the training phase. Each production
scenario has a random number of jobs (5 to
8) with different processing times and different due-dates. Experiments were based on a
random generation of problems with different
problem characteristics (number of jobs, loads,
tightness of jobs, due-date-range, ...). In the
single resource case, each job has one operation,
whereas in the multi-resource case, each job has
a random number of basic operations. Each
operation has a random duration and must be
processed on a certain resource. In the multiresource case we also allow circles - i.e. a job
may have to visit one resource multiple times
- which constitutes an additional difficulty for
conventional solution algorithms. The mean
process duration and the mean due-date were
chosen such that 'interesting' scenarios are created, i.e. that arbitrary policies are not likely
to produce acceptable solutions. As mentioned
above, the production objective considered here
is to reduce the overall tardiness of all the jobs.
To test the generalization ability, 10 test scenarios were generated, which vary from the
For learning, we used a multi-layer perceptron
with up to 6 inputs, 10 hidden neurons and one
output neuron. The learning rate was set to 0.1
(since it was not our goal to optimize the learning speed, not much effort was done to find an
optimal parameter here). During learning, the
jobs are selected randomly (exploration factor
= 1). The performance is reported in terms
of the average tardiness of the jobs when acting greedily with respect to the current value
Table 1 shows the performance of some typical heuristic dispatching rules. The LPT-policy
chooses the job w i t h the longest processing time
first, the minimum-slack (MS)-policy chooses
the job with the minimum time between the expected termination and the due-date, and the
EDD-policy chooses the job with the most urgent due-date. The average tardiness per job
varies considerably on the 10 training scenarios. L P T performs worst with an average tardiness of 18.9, even worse than a random policy
(12.9). MS works considerably better showing
an average tardiness of 7.5, and E D D perfoms
Table 1: Average tardiness on the training set for different heuristic dispatching policies
To test the learning capability of the neural
dispatching agent, several combinations of input features were tested (the feature numbers
in table 2 correspond to the numbering in section 2.4). In general, with a sensitive choice of
input features the performance of the learning
system did improve considerably with the number of production runs (remember that the average tardiness of a random policy is 12.9). Not
surprisingly, the final performance depends crucially on the provided input information. We
observed that the performance of the system
with features that are also considered by the
EDD-rule has the same final performance as the
EDD-rule (column 1). This means, that the
learning system was able to extract this rule
automatically out of the experience it made.
Analogously, the same was true for the MSrule (column 2). When we gave the combination of both features to the learning system, it
was able to find a new policy, that is better
than both EDD and MS (column 3). Actually,
this is the effect we are expecting the learning
agent to exploit: considering a combination of
features that are of different importance in different situations and acquiring a new (probably
very complicated) policy based on the input.
However, adding more features not always improves the performance here (column 4).
Table 2: Learning agent: Average tardiness on the training set for different input feature combinations
Figure 1 gives an impression of the learning process. The bold line shows the performance on
the training set. After about 500 production
runs, the system has a performance of 5.3 and
thus already beats the EDD-policy (5.7). In
course of learning, the performance is further
Besides the principle learning and optimization
capabilities, one major effect we expect to observe is the generalization ability of the learning
system. To test it, the trained neural agent is
applied to situations not included in the training set. The results are shown in table 3.
Figure 1: Improvement of the performance of the
learning system with an increasing number of production runs. The average performance of a random policy was 12.9, and the best heuristic policy,
EDD, achieved an average tardiness of 5.5. The
learning agent beats E D D after only 500 production runs (bold line).
Table 3: Average tardiness for different dispatching policies on the test set (test for generalization)
Again, the neural agent shows the best performance 5.2 and beats the best heuristic rule considerably, which is the SPT-rule here with 6.5.
This shows, that the learning agent is not only
able to optimize its performance on a certain
set of training cases, but also is able to generalize this knowledge to new, previously unknown cases without retraining. It may also be
derived, that the selected features fulfill the requirement of problem independency.
In the multi-resource benchmark we consider a
plant consisting of 3 resources. Here we examine the ability of one learning agent to adapt
to the behaviour of a complex process. This
behaviour is determined by the job profile and
the structure of the plant, but in contrast to
the previous scenario, also dispatching policies
for the other resources play an important role.
While we are examining the case of one learning agent and the other policies being fixed, in
future experiments we will examine situations
of multiple agents learning simultaneously.
In the training scenario, for example, when two
fixed agents are acting according to the FIFO
(First-in-First-Out) rule, than the performance
of the third agent can be improved from 12.2
(the case of also acting according to the FIFO
Table 4: Average tardiness for different dispatching policies in the multi-resource case. The horizontal row denotes the fixed policies of resource 1 and 2, the vertical
row compares the policy of resource 3 for a fixed policy
A major part of this work was carried out during a research visit at the Robotics Institute
at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
The authors gratefully thank Stephen Smith,
Andrew Moore and Jeff Schneider for valuable
discussions. Special thanks to Dieter Spath,
Hartmut Weule, Juergen Schmidt and Wolfram
Menzel for giving us the opportunity and the
principle) to 7.5 (when a learning policy is applied). In order to get an optimal behaviour,
the learning agent has to consider the future
processing policy of a candidate job, too. As
an additional difficulty, since circles may occur
during the lifetime of a job, the current decision
now also determines the future development of
the candidate set. As can be seen in table 4,
the learning agent is capable to deal with the
described difficulties. In all training cases (left
side) and all test cases (right side) the learning policy outperformed the fixed policy. The
agent has autonomously acquired a local policy
based on few relevant decision features, that is
able to perform well in a complex environment
The paper describes a neural network based local learning approach to job shop scheduling
problems. It is based on local learning agents,
associated to a resource. The agent has a restricted view on the complete factory's state,
representing the most important features that
are needed for the local decision. The learning
rule relates a local value function with costs
depending on the overall performance of the
global plant. Doing so, the acquired local decision policy is coordinated with the global optimization goal. The experiments on a oneresource and a three-resource production plant
show the capability to learn local policies to optimize global behaviour from experience. Furthermore, the agent's policy can be generalized to unknown situations without retraining. Therefore, the learned policies are more
tailored to the actual task than comparable
heuristic dispatching rules, but still are general
enough to be valid in a wide range of untrained
situations. In case of major changes in the organizational structure the proposed learning architecture allows an easy reconfiguration of the
R. H. Crites. Improving elevator performance using reinforcement learning.
C. Mozer, editor, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8. M I T Press,
[Boyan and Littman, 1994] Justin Boyan and
Michael Littman. Packet routing in dynamically changing networks - a reinforcement
learning approach. In J. Cowan, G. Tesauro,
and J. Alspector, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6, 1994.
[Brauer and Weiss, 1998] Wilfried Brauer and
Gerhard Weiss. Multi-machine scheduling a multi-agent learning approach. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
and W. Zhang. A reinforcement-learning approach to job-shop scheduling. In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Coference on Artificial Intelligence, 1995.
S. Mahadevan and G. Theocharous. Optimization production manufacturing using reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh International FLAIRS Conference,
[Schneider et al., 1998] Jeff Schneider, Justin
Boyan, and Andrew Moore. Value function based production scheduling. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
