Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
The effect of updating lead times on the performance
Department of Technology Management, Eindhoven University of Technology, NL-5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 16 April 2004; accepted 15 April 2005
In this study, our concern is to show the effect of updating lead times on the performance of a two-level hierarchical
planning system. Lead times are updated by taking periodic feedbacks of the most recent information from the
production environment and using this information in estimating lead times for planning the future production orders.
A simulation model is used based on a multistage production planning and scheduling environment where the
components are manufactured in a general job shop and ﬁnal products are manufactured in a ﬂow shop. Our results
demonstrate that under certain conditions frequent updates of lead times will lead to uncontrolled production system
r 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Hierarchical planning; Scheduling; Lead time; Production planning
In many manufacturing situations hierarchical planning paradigm has been found to be a suitable and
satisfactory framework for structuring the management tasks. Due to its simplicity in implementation and
managerial facilities it provides it has widely been used in practice. As well, an extensive piece of literature
has been built during the last decades, which can be distinguished in three principal lines:
(1) The hierarchical production planning (HPP) models, based on Hax and Meal (1975), are
characterized by deterministic optimization models at each of the hierarchical levels, and by pure topdown inﬂuence of higher-levels on lower-levels. The majority of the research in this line has concentrated on
aggregation–disaggregation rules and heuristics (e.g., Axsäter and Jonsson (1984), and Bitran and Hax
(1977)). (2) The conceptual hierarchies developed by Bertrand et al. (1990) are characterized by separating
Corresponding author. Tel.: +31 40 2473828; fax: +31 40 2465949.
E-mail address: b.selcuk@tm.tue.nl (B. Selc- uk).
0925-5273/$ - see front matter r 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
out semi-autonomous units (production units) along a (manufacturing) supply chain and the introduction
of a goods ﬂow control function (GFC). Hierarchical control is primarily aimed at enabling a lower level to
reach its goals, where it negotiates with the higher level about acceptable workloads. (3) The organizational
planning hierarchies (OPH) introduced by Schneeweiss (1995) are based on two explicit concepts, namely
information asymmetry and goal asymmetry. Information asymmetry refers to the difference in the
information statuses of hierarchical levels and goal asymmetry refers to the difference in the objectives of
hierarchical levels. The integration between hierarchical levels is achieved through building an anticipation
of the lower-level model within the higher-level model. By this way the higher-level decisions are structured
by taking into account the information status of the lower-level.
Whereas the models described above have been developed conceptually, few performance evaluation
results are available. In HPP models, comparisons have been made between the relative performances of
hierarchical models vs. integrated monolithical models (e.g., Graves (1982)). Studies are mainly
concentrated on solving consistency and feasibility problems between different hierarchical levels. Gelders
and Van Wassenhove (1982) states that deterministic rolling plans are often employed in practice for
coordination purposes. However, very little theoretical research has been done on the analysis of
hierarchical planning systems in a rolling schedule environment, and the evaluations are limited to the static
deterministic models (i.e., Dempster et al. (1981)). Chung and Krajewski (1987) is the ﬁrst one that modeled
a rolling horizon feedback procedure to coordinate aggregate planning with master scheduling. However,
they ignore the stochastic nature of the manufacturing systems, which is, in our concern, a signiﬁcant
GFC models are conceptually richer than the HPP models, especially for multistage production–distribution systems. The distinction between goods ﬂow control and the production unit control provides
further modeling of operational units in a supply chain, which is the missing feature in HPP framework.
However, performance evaluation results for this methodology, especially in a dynamic stochastic setting
Similarly, OPH methodology puts emphasis on the operational integration of hierarchical-levels through
the concept of anticipation. Although the framework is fairly conceptual and very few performance
evaluation results are available, only recently, Rohde (2004) proposes a two-level hierarchical structure
including dynamic update of setup times through an artiﬁcial neural network-based anticipation. Rolling
horizons method is applied to gather data for the anticipation purposes, employing a learning mechanism
inﬂuenced by the past performance of the lower-level models.
In addition to such theoretical concerns, in practice, the production planning and control softwares are
generally treated as black-boxes. Practitioners assume that as long as the tool looks correct it is correct and
the planning parameters are usually set according to a priori simulation results, intuition, and experience.
However, it is intuitively not possible to estimate the environmental parameters perfectly. Especially, in
today’s modern manufacturing systems where uncertainty is an important determinant of the performance
there is a need to facilitate a dynamic and adaptive hierarchical production planning framework, as also
In this study our primary concern is to provide qualitative and quantitative insights on how updating
lead times at every replanning epoch may affect the performance of a two-level hierarchical planning system
for a two-stage, multi product production/assembly situation (see Fig. 1). A considerable research has been
Fig. 1. Two-stage production/assembly system.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
built on the analysis of manufacturing lead times (e.g., Karmarkar (1987) and Zijm and Buitenhek (1996)).
It is explicitly stated that unlike production design parameters such as unit processing times, total capacity,
setup times, etc. lead times are observed not as inputs to the production system but as the output of a
complex process where lot sizes, demand pattern, work in process levels, etc. interact each other. Therefore,
we employ a rolling horizon procedure to gather the most recent information from the shop-ﬂoor and we
generate new estimations of lead times by employing an exponential smoothing technique. Similarly Vig
and Dooley (1991) applied a moving average technique to forecast expected lead times. Our two-level
hierarchical planning system is composed of a goods ﬂow control model at the top-level, to coordinate the
production between consecutive stages, and a machine scheduling and sequencing model at the bottomlevel.
We ﬁrst present the models for both goods ﬂow control and release order scheduling in Section 2. In this
section the hierarchical structure and the lead time update procedure are also discussed. Then we report the
research design and the experimental results in Section 3. Finally, a summary of the results and concluding
The manufacturing environment is based on the following assumptions: Produce-to-stock manufacturing
strategy is applied at both stages. The intermediate items and the purchased items have only internal
demand, which is based on the forecasted demand of the ﬁnal products and aggregate planning. The setup
times are zero and machine breakdowns are not allowed at both production stages. The safety stock for all
purchased items, components and ﬁnal products are zero. A general job shop manufactures/assembles
components possibly using common items. A ﬂow shop manufactures/assembles ﬁnal products.
Fig. 2 provides a simplistic picture of the bill of materials (BOM) and bill of processes (BOP) structure of
a ﬁnal product. Department D1 produces ﬁnal product F1 through a series of processes in three machines
M1, M2 and M3 in a ﬂow shop. Department D2 produces components, C1 and C2 in a job shop using
Fig. 2. BOM and BOP structure of end item F1.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
Fig. 3. Two-level hierarchical planning structure.
The proposed hierarchical structure, shown in Fig. 3, follows the frameworks proposed in Bertrand et al.
(1990) and Schneeweiss (1995). At the top-level of the hierarchical system, an integer linear program is
solved to determine the optimal production release quantities for each stage. The optimal ﬂow of goods for
a ﬁxed planning horizon between different production stages is decided. The solution of the top-level has to
be feasible in terms of the resource constraints at the bottom-level. This is done by employing the
anticipated version of the base-level within the top-level model. In this model there is an implicit
nonreactive anticipation, that is, only a part of the base-level is anticipated. The total capacity for each
stage is aggregated from the individual machine capacities. Together with the lead time estimates, capacity
consumption by the open release orders has to be estimated in order to anticipate the total available
At the bottom-level detailed production schedules for the release orders of components and ﬁnal
products are decided for each of the production stages.
The ﬂow of goods between different production stages is controlled via timely releases of orders to meet
their projected internal and external demands. An integer linear program is provided below to serve for this
function. The formulation follows the supply chain operations management (SCOP) model in De Kok and
set of items including purchased items, components and ﬁnal products ¼ {1,2, ..., n}
number of item i needed to produce one item j. i, j A N
set of end items ¼ {i: aij ¼ 0, 8j ¼ 1,..., n}
set of purchased items ¼ {j: aij ¼ 0, 8i ¼ 1,..., n }
production department index, k ¼ 1, ..., K
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
production or procurement lead time of item i, i A N\P
Ck ¼ capacity of department k, k ¼ 1, ..., K
Uk ¼ set of items that are produced in department k, k ¼ 1, ..., K
Di (t, t + s) ¼ exogenous demand for end item i in period t + s as recorded at the start of period t, tX 1,
Bi (t, t + s) ¼ backlog of item i at the start of period t + s as recorded at the start of period t, tX1,
Ii (t, t + s) ¼ inventory level of item i at the start of period t + s as recorded at the start of period t, t X1,
ri (t, t + s) ¼ quantity of item i released at the start of period t + s as recorded at the start of period t, tX1,
qi (t, t + s) ¼ resource utilized for item i in period t + s as recorded at the start of period t, tX1, s X 1 – t,
Note that, Ii(t, t) and Bi(t, t) represent actuals and are inputs for the program. At each iteration of the
rolling horizon these inputs are computed based on the latest actual demand information and the
production quantity of each item. In addition, ri(t, t + s) and qi(t, t + s) for 1 – tpso0 represent actuals and
I i ðt; t þ s þ 1Þ  Bi ðt; t þ s þ 1Þ ¼ I i ðt; t þ sÞ  Bi ðt; t þ sÞ 
Bi ðt; t þ s þ 1Þ  Bi ðt; t þ sÞpDi ðt; t þ sÞ
i ¼ 1; . . . ; n; s ¼ 0; . . . ; T þ Li  2
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
Constraint set (1) balances the material ﬂow between planning periods. It simply equates the total supply to
the total demand in each period. Constraint set (2) indicates that the quantity backordered at each period
cannot exceed the external demand of the corresponding item. It guarantees that the backorder of an
intermediate item cannot be used to meet the internal demands of the higher-level items in the BOM.
Constraint set (3) provides the ﬂexibility in the quantity produced at each period. Constraint set (4) ensures
that any release will be produced within its given lead time. Finally, constraint set (5) sets capacity
restrictions for each department. Constraint set (4) includes the open release orders as an input to the
production quantity decisions, which, together with constraint set (5), formulates the available capacity
GFC provides the optimal production orders for every component item and the ﬁnal product over the
entire planning horizon. As a natural consequence of rolling-horizon method, only the ﬁrst planning
period’s production decisions are passed to the base-level for detailed scheduling and sequencing on the
machines. All newly released orders are passed to the bottom-level simultaneously. The scheduling of these
orders at each machine is done in a random fashion. However, at each planning period, there may also be
already existing orders from the previous periods still waiting to be processed. The newly released orders
are scheduled after the already existing orders, that is, when we consider multiperiod schedules there is a
The scheduling strategy for the machines in the production departments is a nonpreemptive undelayed
schedule. Once the processing of a job is initiated it cannot be stopped before its completion, and no
machine is kept idle as long as there are available orders and available materials to be processed.
We applied a ‘‘lot-for-lot’’ lot sizing strategy; the items produced within an order are not booked into
available inventory until the entire production lot has been processed. This is done in order to be consistent
with the top-level model’s material balance assumption. Accordingly, lot splitting is not allowed.
In this two-stage production system, the component items are produced in a general job shop where the
ﬁnal products are produced in a ﬂow shop. Therefore, the queueing of release orders in both the ﬁnal
products and component items production plays an important role in determining the production lead
times. Especially in the ﬂow shop case, also due to the ‘‘lot-for-lot’’ assumption, both the effective
production capacity and the lead times largely depend on how orders are sequenced in front of the
machines. In a ﬂow shop, an order with a large lot size delays the production of the following orders and
generates a temporary bottleneck in the system.
The plan of GFC and its actual execution may deviate from each other because of the detailed
characteristics of the shop ﬂoor that cannot be seen at the GFC, such as queueing of orders in front of
the machines, uncertainty in processing times, etc. As a result, feedback from the shop ﬂoor is needed
(e.g. realized lead times, open release orders, produced quantities) so that more realistic anticipation of the
base-level can be done at the top-level. The modules attached to the anticipation function (see Fig. 3) use
the most recent information generated by the execution of past decisions. The proposed ﬂow diagram for
the solution procedure based on the above hierarchical structure is given in Fig. 4.
For the sake of simplicity and tractability of the results, only the ﬁnal product lead times are updated
where Li;t is the lead time estimation of end item i in period t, Li;t1 the realized lead time of end item i in
period t1, and a the smoothing constant. The realized lead time of an order is exactly the time elapsed
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
Fig. 4. Flow diagram for the multiperiod planning procedure.
between the release of that order to the shop ﬂoor and its completion time. However, updating lead times
can cause infeasibility for aggregate planning. We solve this problem by a resource allocation mechanism
(RAM), which is the subject of the following subsection.
In a similar manner the demand forecasts are updated at every replanning by exponential smoothing:
where D^ i;t1 is the demand estimation of end item i in period t, Di;t the realized demand of end item i in
period t1, and b the smoothing constant.
A signiﬁcant concern about lead times update is that the aggregate model can become infeasible
because the current lead time assumption is not long enough to capture the capacity requirements
of the past released quantities. This effect becomes obvious when we look at the constraint sets (4) and (5)
of GFC formulation. Let us consider a single item iAUk where C k ¼ 500 min and pik ¼ 5 min. In the
current period the lead time estimation, L^ i;t ¼ 6 periods, which, in the aggregate plan, utilizes availability of
resources for a release of item i during six periods. Let us say that 600 units of item i are released,
ri ðt; tÞ ¼ 600, and the associated process quantity, qi ðt; tÞ ¼ 100 units. Let us assume that in the next
replanning, L^ i;tþ1 ¼ 3 periods. Then the GFC becomes infeasible due to the interrelation between the
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
ri ðt þ 1; t þ 1Þ  qi ðt þ 1; t þ 1Þ  qi ðt þ 1; t þ 2Þ  qi ðt þ 1; t þ 3Þp  500,
This problem can be solved by a resource allocation mechanism. The main purpose here is to allocate scarce
capacity among the open orders in order to obtain maximum utilization. The gain obtained by the
utilization of a unit of capacity for a speciﬁc item is directly proportional to the dollar value of the current
backorder level of that item and inversely proportional to the unit processing time of that item. Such a
resource allocation mechanism where all the items share a common capacity can be formulated as an
where k is the department that is in short of capacity at period t. bi , pi , U k , Bi ðt; tÞ, qi ðt; tÞ, and C k are as
Integer knapsack problems can be solved to optimality by dynamic programming techniques. However, in
the problem above, the weights of qi ðt; tÞ, 8i 2 U k are all equal in the constraint (16)
simple optimal solution: Assign all the capacity to a single item with the highest bi Bi ðt; tÞ=pi value.
The production system consists of two departments (manufacturing centers), one job shop that produces
component items and one ﬂow shop that produces ﬁnal products. Through its ﬂexible routing structure job
shop generates a smooth production of components with less variation in lead times and work in process
levels. Flow shop, a shop structure that is more suitable for ﬁnal item assembly, can be problematic
especially under high level of variation in demand. Each department consists of three machines (processing
cells) with identical unit processing time distribution. Table 1 provides a list of items together with their
parent-child relationships and routing information.
The planning horizon is divided into weekly buckets. A rule of thumb commonly seen in the practitioner
literature is that planning horizon for master schedules should be at least as long as the cumulative
manufacturing plus procurement lead time (i.e., the critical path in the bill of material). The purchase
orders are assumed to be replenished from an ample stock within the same week. The job shop utilization is
subject to experimental design where 65% and 80% utilizations are considered separately. Both cases give
an average lead time of 1 week for each component. The ﬂow shop utilization is kept ﬁxed at the level of
65%. The ﬁnal product lead times are however dynamic and updated regularly. The minimum ﬁnal product
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
lead time is 1 week. Therefore, we used a planning horizon of 10 weeks to capture the possible increases in
the estimated lead times of ﬁnal products.
Relying on the terminology deﬁned previously the initiation of the variables are as follows: D^ i;1 ¼ 400,
Bi ð1; 1Þ ¼ 0, I i ð1; 1Þ ¼ Lcum  D^ i;1 ¼ 400, 8i 2 E; Bi ð1; 1Þ ¼ I i ð1; 1Þ ¼ 0, 8i 2 N\E. The initial backorders
for all ﬁnal products are set to zero and the initial inventories of the ﬁnal products are equal to the average
demand during the initial cumulative lead time assumption ðLcum Þ in order to smooth the effects of
increasing backorders during the ﬁrst few weeks of the simulation. The initial backorders and inventories of
all other items are set to zero, and they do not have external demand. The forecast update parameters are;
b ¼ 0:2, and a ¼ 0:2. Such a small value of a avoids big jumps and provides smoothed estimations of lead
The experimental design conducted in this study is described in Table 2. There are four factors with 36
treatments in total. The ﬁxed lead times for ﬁnal products are of two-fold; zero lead times and greater than
zero lead times. In the zero lead times case GFC module assumes that production orders will be completed
within the period that they are released. However, the actual system characteristics are maintained, since
our aim is to quantify the effects of different design approaches. Greater than zero lead times are those that
will be seen in the idealistic situation. For example, in the ﬂow shop, due to the shop settings deﬁned
previously, each of the ﬁnal products has two weeks of average lead time in a completely deterministic
environment. Such a ﬁxed lead time approach is also applied by Billington et al. (1983) in a LP formulation
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
Other experimental design factors are due to the system characteristics. The subassembly capacity or the
capacity used for the production of components can be ﬁnite or inﬁnite. In the earlier case utilization can be
either low, 65%, or high, 80%. Low utilization is achieved by an Erlang(9, 9/4) distributed unit processing
times of each machine in the job shop. High utilization shop has Erlang(9, 9/5) distributed unit processing
times per machine. The inﬁnite capacitated case is abbreviated by 0% utilization. The machines in the ﬂow
shop possess Erlang(9, 9/8) unit processing times. Besides, environmental uncertainty is considered via
coefﬁcient of variation of demand, dD where dD ¼ 0:2 comes from an Erlang(25, 0.0625) distribution, and
dD ¼ 0:5 comes from an Erlang(4, 0.01) distribution. The relevance of backorder costs to inventory costs is
analyzed to see the effect of cost structure.
Full factorial design is employed where a total of 36 different experimental designs are simulated in 10
repetitions, each during 1000 weeks, with different random number generators. To make the analysis more
reliable common random numbers are used between different experimental designs.
In Fig. 5 total periodic costs are smoothed according to the Welch’s procedure, as described in detail in
Law and Kelton (2000), in order to deﬁne the warm-up period of the simulations. The values are based on a
single experimental design setting where similar pattern follows for the other settings too.
where Sk is the smoothed average, TCi,r the total cost for period i in iteration r, and Er[TCi,r] the expected
total cost for period i over all iterations. m is a constant used to determine the number of values to be
considered within single smoothed average. We chose m ¼ 200. The system reaches its steady state after
approximately the 150th period. Therefore the statistical analysis is based on the results between the 151st
Fig. 5. Smoothed graph of total periodic cost for dD ¼ 0:5, r ¼ 0%, and g ¼ 10.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
We aim to ﬁnd insights on how to set the lead time as a parameter in your planning tool. The effects of
different approaches are determined by this simulation study. The performance evaluations are done
according to the average periodic total cost. In addition, instability arises as an important concern in the
updated lead times approach. Here, we deﬁne instability as the occurrence of very large lead time
estimations that extend beyond planning horizon. Table 3 provides the average performance results, note
that the instability is denoted by N, and variable lead time is denoted by t~ .
A strong declaration about the best lead time strategy is not possible as seen in the results. However, we
can still make some general remarks. For example, it is not efﬁcient to employ an adaptive planning system
when there is too much noise in the production system itself and its environment. The updated lead times
put additional variability in the manufacturing activities that aggravates already difﬁcult situation.
However, in some settings as in the case of 65% component production utilization, which we call settings
with moderate variability, updating lead times performs best. Increasing the variability in the system in that
sense works in favor of system performance; especially under expensive backorder cost assumption the
improvement is impressive. This observation contradicts with the common belief that considers system
variability as a cost-generating phenomenon. Here, the noise is not a structural part of the system under
observation, but created by the planner through dynamic estimates of lead times. Different actual lead time
patterns depending on the planned lead time estimates are depicted in the ﬁgures below.
Fig. 6 clearly states the lead time inﬂation in the system due to the dynamic lead time estimates. Such a
phenomenon is conceptually deﬁned in the literature as ‘‘lead time syndrome’’. Bigger lead times incur
larger orders to be released to the ﬂow shop which cause temporary bottlenecks to occur. As a natural
result capacity losses can occur due to ﬂow shop structure causing bigger lead times in the system, and the
lead times provokes each other. Therefore, we can state that adaptive planning systems are not suitable for
situations when there are signiﬁcant contingencies in the environment, such as material starvation, demand
When material starvation effect is weak, generating a ‘‘moderate’’ noise in the system, then the actual
lead time realizations follow a stable pattern as seen in Fig. 7. In order to improve the visibility of the ﬁgure
by a smooth pattern, moving averages with sample size of 10 are displayed instead of the actual lead time
values. The coefﬁcient of variations of actual lead times under different planned lead time strategies are:
CVðt ¼ 0Þ ¼ 0:57, CVðt40Þ ¼ 0:98, CVð~tÞ ¼ 0:92. It should be noted that updating lead times does not
cause additional variability in the system when compared to ﬁxed and greater than zero-planned lead times.
Besides, it results in better cost performance. Recall from the GFC formulation in the previous sections that
the capacity allocated for an order is limited by the planned lead times, which in turn affects the release
quantities. A small value for the lead time estimation means a tighter upper bound, and a large value for
% improvements over average periodic costs of t ¼ 0
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
Fig. 6. Actual lead time occurrences, r ¼ 80%, dD ¼ 0:5, g ¼ 10.
Fig. 7. Actual lead time patterns, r ¼ 65%, dD ¼ 0:5, g ¼ 10.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
planned lead time means a more relaxed upper bound for the release quantities. Dynamic planned lead
times in that sense provide the planning ﬂexibility resulting in better cost performance.
In this study we analyzed the effect of updating lead times on the performance of hierarchical planning
systems in a dynamic and stochastic setting. By using discrete event simulation we showed that under
‘‘realistic’’ conditions updated lead times policy causes unavoidable increase in lead times and, as a result,
unstable, inefﬁcient decision making. However, for settings with low degree of variability lead time update
Speciﬁcally, a robust determination of the best lead time strategy, among the ones proposed in this paper,
is not available. Dynamic planned lead times do provide the planning ﬂexibility for the order release
mechanism but on the other hand are too sensitive to random ﬂuctuations in the system. For situations
with high number of uncertainties, this effect becomes even intolerable, due to huge lead time occurrences.
As a result, for realistic, two-stage production systems one should pay special attention to internal stability
problems if he is to update the planned lead times.
To sum up, the performance of hierarchical planning systems largely depends on the correct parameter
setting. As an alternative, the concept of adaptive hierarchical planning systems has been recognized over a
decade. However, there are still very few studies on this appealing approach. This study provides the
opportunities and threats of adaptive lead times strategy and points out future research directions such as:
The modeling of a robust adaptive lead time strategy that is stable and at the same time provides the
The detailed analysis of the trade off between being stable and being adaptive, including the effect of
Axsäter, S., Jonsson, H., 1984. Aggregation and disaggregation in hierarchical production planning. European Journal of Operational
Bertrand, J.W.M., Wortmann, J.C., Wijngaard, J., 1990. Production control: A structural and design oriented approach. Elsevier,
Billington, P.J., McClain, J.O., Thomas, L.J., 1983. Mathematical programming approaches to capacity-constrained MRP systems:
Review, formulation and problem reduction. Management Science 29, 1126–1141.
Bitran, G.R., Hax, A.C., 1977. On the design of hierarchical production planning systems. Decision Sciences 8, 28–55.
Chung, C.H., Krajewski, L.J., 1987. Interfacing aggregate plans and master schedules via a rolling horizon feedback procedure.
OMEGA International Journal of Management Science 15 (5), 401–409.
De Kok, A.G., Fransoo, J.C., 2003. Planning supply chain operations: Deﬁnition and comparison of planning concepts. In: De Kok,
A.G., Graves, S.C. (Eds.), OR Handboook on Supply Chain Management. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 597–675.
Dempster, M.A.H., Fisher, M.L., Jansen, L., Lageweg, B.J., Lenstra, J.K., Rinnooy Kan, A.H.G., 1981. Analytical evaluation of
hierarchical planning systems. Operations Research 29 (4), 707–716.
Gelders, L.F., Van Wassenhove, L.N., 1982. Hierarchical integration in production planning: Theory and practice. Journal of
Graves, S.C., 1982. Using lagrangian techniques to solve hierarchical production planning problems. Management Science 28,
Hax, A.C., Meal, H.C., 1975. Hierarchical integration of production planning and scheduling. In: Geisler, M.A. (Ed.), Logistics.
Karmarkar, U.S., 1987. Lot sizes, lead times and in-process inventories. Management Science 33 (3), 409–418.
Law, A.M., Kelton, W.D., 2000. Simulation Modeling and Analysis, third ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.
B. Selc- uk et al. / Int. J. Production Economics 104 (2006) 427–440
McKay, K.N., Safayeni, F.R., Buzacott, J.A., 1995. A review of hierarchical production planning and its applicability for modern
manufacturing. Production Planning & Control 6 (5), 384–394.
Rohde, J., 2004. Hierarchical supply chain planning using artiﬁcial neural networks to anticipate base-level outcomes. OR Spectrum
Schneeweiss, C., 1995. Hierarchical structures in organisations: A conceptual framework. European Journal of Operational Research
Vig, M.M., Dooley, K.J., 1991. Dynamic rules for due date assignment. International Journal of Production Research 29 (7),
Zijm, W.H.M., Buitenhek, R., 1996. Capacity planning and lead time management. International Journal of Production Economics
