PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
All rights reserved including the right to re-
produce this book or parts thereof in any form.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Artists and philosophers as well as physicists, physiologists, and
psychologists have long been interested in isolating the factors which
make possible man's visual world. Physicians who are interested in the
eye and its diseases, illuminating engineers, photographers, designers
of photographic and motion picture equipment, and many others in pure
and applied science are also concerned with certain aspects of this
The present book represents the culmination of nearly a quarter of
a century of study of visual phenomena by its able author. He has ap
proached the problem in an eclectic manner. In its pages the point of
view of the student who is being introduced to the subject is never forgotten.
The author emphasizes the fact that a fundamental condition for
seeing is an array of physical surfaces which reflect light that is then
projected on the retina. He further gives new emphasis to the importance
of considering the retinal images of each eye as involving steps and
The student will find in this volume an interesting discussion of
the old and difficult problem of the nature of visual depth. The author
also deals with the constancy of the characteristics of perceived ob
jects in relation to geometric space and many other related topics.
Throughout the book theories of perception are carefully evaluated.
Certainly the present volume can be recommended to all artists and
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
who are interested in learning about the nature of man's
The study of perceptual problems is central in psychological theory.
The study of perception has sometimes been called "psychologists'
psychology" because professional students of man's mental life most
clearly recognize the basic nature of perceptual problems. Today, when
more than ever before many special applications of psychology are attracting the attention of students in this field, it is fortunate that Dr.
Gibson has prepared this new and stimulating volume. It will again
direct the interest of serious students of psychology to the basic problems of perception, especially as they are related to this greatest of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The principal subject of this book is the visual perception of
space. The essential question to be asked is this: How do we see the
world around us? The question is at once a theoretical one, a factual
one, and a practical one. The theories to be considered have to do with
the history of philosophy and psychology. The facts come from psychol
ogy, physics, and physiology. The applications extend to art, aviation,
photography, and mountain-climbing. This book, however, is not a
historical survey of the problem, nor a record of the existing facts, nor
a discussion of the applications. The intention is to formulate a con
sistent approach to the problem a way of getting new facts and making
new applications. The construction of a theory is most useful when the
theory is ttvu1nerab1e, that is to say, when future experiments can but
do not disprove it. A strenuous effort has been made to keep the proa'
positions of this book explicit enough to be potentially incorrect. Need
less to say, the author hopes that they will comprehend the facts and
will predict the results of future experiments.
A theoretical approach is called for because the perception ot
what has been called space is the basic problem of all perception. We
perceive a world whose fundamental variables are spatial and temporal
a world which extends and which endures. Space perception (from
which time is inseparable) is not, therefore, a division of the subject
matter of perception but the first problem to consider, without a solution for which other problems remain unclear. That a solution is 1ack
ing, most psychologists would agree. The existing theories to account
for the spatial and temporal character of our perceptions are not very
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
This book has a great deal to say about the physical stimuli which
are the correlates of perception, but relatively little to say about the
activities of the sense organs and the brain which are also the correlates
of perception. The writer has elected to study psychophysics rather than
psychophysiology because he believes that it offers the more promising
approach in the present state of our knowledge. This is not to minimize
the importance of physiology. Such books as Bartley's Vision: 4 Study
of its Basis (6) are essential to an understanding of the complete
process. What we lack, however, ¡s an application of the psychophysical
A psychophysics of perception may sound to some readers like a
contradiction in terms. This book undertakes, however, to justify and
make possible such a science. For many years, experimental evidence
has accumulated about the effect of the observer's attitude on perception, the influence of culture on perception, and the roles of past experience and of sensory organization in perception. All these experiments, however revealing, leave out of account the simple question of
the relation of the stimulus to perception. Until this question is settled
the other evidence will be hard to evaluate.
Several recent currents of psychological thought have influenced
the writing of this book: the ideas of Gestalt psychology, of American
functionalism, and of what might be called dimensionalism.
twentieth century scientists to whom I am most in debt are Kurt KoiTha,
Leonard T. Troland, and Edwin G. Boring. The hypotheses I have
adopted were precipitated by research in the field of military aviation,
Every book is a collaboration of its writer with others. The
hardest collateral labor that went into these pages was performed by
Eleanor J. Gibson, my wife, whose scientific conscience is stricter than
my own and to whom the reader ought to be very grateful1 This book is
for her, with thanks and affection. The text has also been combed by
Leonard Carmichael, editor of psychological books for Houghton Mifflin
and one of my earliest teachers, with so much insight and erudition that
I can never repay him. At an early stage of the manuscript it was carefully read by S. Rains Wallace who made the kind of detailed and
penetrating comments that only a genuine friend is capable of. I am
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
grateful likewise to a number of other friends and colleagues who have
gone over large or small parts of the manuscript: Robert B. MacLeod,
John Volkmann, T. A. Ryan, Edwin G. Boring, Wolfgang Kohier, Hans
Wallach, Annalies A. Rose, Fritz Heider, R. T. Sollenberger, H. E.
Israel, Mervin Jules, and Oliver W. Larkin. Thanks are especially due
to Frederick N. Dibble, who has worked with me for several y ears in
testing experimentally some of the hypotheses to be described and who
helped formulate them. Finally, my debt must be acknowledged to
Robert M. Gagne and the co-workers of my wartime research unit who
performed the feat of behaving like scientists in a military community.
This is a book intended to interest anyone who has ever acquired a
sense of the awe'4nspiring intricacy of vision. No realm of inquiry of»
fers more strange and wonderful discoveries.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
TO LOOK AT THE ILLUSTRATIONS IN THIS BOOK
effect will generally be clearer and more
for the full effect to occur. This rule applies to the photographs and drawings but
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Stimulus Variables for Visual Depth and Distance
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Stimulus Variables for Visual 1)epth and Distance
The Problem of the Stable and Boundless Visual World
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
application of their own bodies to this or
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
potheses of a "Ground Theory" of Space Percep.
are, as everybody knows, a number of conditions which have to be fulfilled before
anyone can see: there must be light to see
by; the eyes tnust be open; the eyes must
focus and point properly; the sensitive film
at the rear of each eyeball must react to
light; the optic nerves must transmit impulses to the brain. Just so long as one
of these conditions is not fulfilled, the
not thought about the problem find it difuicult to realize that sight depends on
such a complicated chain of circumstances,
guide for getting about and doing things.
steamshovel. He can read print, or look at
pictures, or identify faces. He can discriminate objects which resemble one another even at a considerable distance. All
man can climb a cliff, drive an automobile,
things. He can design and build machines,
environment almost to suit himself. Or, as
another possibility, he can simply sit and
This last, in a way, is the most astonishing performance of all, for the view
of a room or a countryside which one gets
when he simply looks at it in a receptive
view is enormous. What is most astonishing is that it is in every detail a nervous
process. The panorarnais utterly and entirely a performance of the living organism.
If the brain is injured in a particular way,
kind of blindness is related to the particular injury. If the optic nerve or the
retina of the eye is damaged in some part,
sight suffers damage in a precisely corresponding way. The simplest experiment
is to close one's eyes and reflect on the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
have felt the need for some explanation of
puzzles to which the problem leads, perhaps the oldest and most general of al]
is this:fhow can one account for the richness of sight considering the poverty of
on this retinal picture. But what an inadequate thing the image seems to be when
on the pictures in the eyes and yet produce
The physical eivironment has three dimensions; it is projected by light on a sensitive surface of two dimensions; it is perceived neverthe]ess in three dimensions.
How can the lost third dimension be restored in perception?
space. The question is put in terms of the
and depth. In a sense, this book is about
space perception. The plan of these chapters, however, is to end with the problem
of abstract space rather than to begin with
it. The space to be considered first is not
streets, and regions, and the space of men
puzzle of the third dimension can be much
better understood if we first examine the
scenes we actually see and the ones which
for an answer takes one so far afield that
another example, how do we see the motion
distinguished from its general background?
Probably this last reduces to two questions: first, how can we see an outline as
separated from its background, and second,
formulate scientifically because they are
things have location, that is, how can we
acuity? Why do things look right side up?
see to fly airplanes and drive automobiles?
What does the artist see when he paints a
picture? Why is a photograph so astonishingly like the scene at which the camera
inevitably fall short of natural seeing? Can
to advantage in school and college? These
but it is fruitless to look for their solution
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
our knowledge of it everything else dehow do we see light and how can
in a way, the raw material of vision. The
perception of an object in space would be
impossible if we were not sensitive to the
light reflected from the object and to the
evidence is not enough to provide answers
different from the seeing of abstract color.
problem is that of perception, not of sensation.
we get the experience of a concrete visual
properties seem to be these: it is extended
it is colored, shadowed, illuminated, and
textured; it is composed of surfaces, edges,
shapes, and interspaces; finally, and most
important of all, it is filled with things
for the perception of these properties of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
1. It represents an uninteresting dry river
bordered by a tall growth of bushes, with
two men standing in the foreground. It will
serve as an example of what is meant by a
concrete visual world. Let us consider it
abstractly without regard to the familiar
bottom part of the picture (the "ground")
generally level and this surface appears to
extend to a great distance. Actually it is
located with reference to the ground. Parts
of the ground appear to be illuminated and
pattern of light and dark, that is, an enormously complicated mosaic of grays,
fails in some ways to look like the actual
scene, is quite similar to it, what makes
the properties which give it the appearance
of concrete visual reality seem to be just
contour, shape, adjacent location, illumi
nation, and shading. The list is tentative
and incomplete but it illustrates the kind
There are, of course, other properties of an
photograph but are nevertheless important
the stereoscopic impressions dependent on
vision with two eyes, and the vivid qualities of depth which occur when the head is
The contributions of these impressions to the perception of space have
not, as is sometimes believed, the exclusive basis of our perception of a threedimensional world.
represented in Figure 1, 1er us imagine the
perception obtained by an observer in the
nearest possible approach to empty visual
space. Assume that his environment consisted wholly of atmosphere without any
time at the center of such a sphere of air
although, without the gravity of the earth,
he could not maintain a posture or change
his location. Suppose that this environment
is illuminated by external sources but that
his world of air is so large as to diffuse
the light evenly, as our familiar sky tends
to diffuse the light of the sun. If he opens
The light which stimulates the retinas of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
not focus or converge and he cannot fixate
or look at anything for there is nothing to
fixate on. Ile will see luminosity or color
but it is the kind of color which Katz has
surface-color (61). It is unlocalized in the
third dimension; its distance is indeterminate. The sea of light around him might
vary from bright to dark and from one hue
to another but the quality of color would
be neither that of a surface on the one hand
other. It is neither near nor far. The space
in the sense of being flat but it is also not
cloudless, without dust or fog-particles, it
has no texture, no arrangement, no contours, no shapes, no solidity, and no horiThe observer
then, that what an observer would perceive
the nearest thing to no perception at all.
The suggestion is that visual space, unlike abstract geometrical space, is perceived only by virtue of what fills it.
sphere of pure air is even further instructive. Although he would presumably have
no impressions of far or near, and no sense
of his surroundings as being either flat like
a picture or modeled like a sculpture, that
is not all he would lack. Almost certainly
body and the resistance of his legs against
the substratum are wholly lacking,he would
have no equilibrium and could not maintain
a posture. He would feel as if he were floating. Although he could look toward or away
from his feet and could see his right hand
and his left hand, these acts would probably
,have lost much of their normal meaning of
up or down, right or left, and he wtuld experience a profound and complete disorientation. He could thrash about but could
space, and in fact he would have no position in a visible environment. Pis sense
of the vertical and horizontal directions
postural reflexes and. by the main lines of
trees, tables, and rooms) would be wholly
reference for his space it is questionable
'Besides the experiments of Katz on filmcolor (61) there are also the results of Metz-
the illumination until nothing was seen but
film or fog. The conclusion of these experiments was that a visual surface depends on
the perception of tm1crostructure, that is,
the minute inhomogeneities of reflected light
which give it a texture or grain. These resuits are to be contrasted with the theory of
Bühler that space might be given by a hypothetical "air-light"
atmosphere dependent on molecular particles
This supposition has never received con( 16).
firmation, and Bh1er himself abandoned it.
ger on homogeneous light stimulation over the
total visual field, the Ganzfeld (81). Taken
together, they suggest the above results for a
hypothetical observer floating in air. Katz
of a hole in a surface behind which is another
surface too distant to yield the perception of
a surface. Metzger studied the appearance of
a uniform surface which filled the whole field
of view. He made it homogeneous by reducing
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
whether he could be said to perceive even
applied to aviation. The critical task of
estimating distance froni the ground when a
flier is landing an airplane was particularly
about it from the great experiments of the
19th century. A list of the clues or cues
object had resulted from these experiments
monocular according to whether they depended on the use of two eyes dr one eye.
to employ a stereoscope, or a depth-perception apparatus, or a dark room in which
points of light or similar isolated stimuli
appeàred against a homogeneous background. The fact was, however, that these
which study the effect of eliminating cornpletely the force of gravity on the perceptions
of a human observer. They are needed, since
the rocket-passenger outside the earth's gravitational field will meet just this condition, and
it is no longer fantastic to be concerned with
the problem. A man falling freely toward the
earth satisfies the condition, but volunteers
for such an experiment are rare. In any event,
there has been no instance in which a man
without postural stimulation has also been
presented with absolutely homogeneous visual
consistent with such evidence as exists (42).
experiments failed to clarify the practical
predicted a prospective flier's success or
failure at this task. Many suggestions for
evident to psychologists working on problems of aviation that the usual approach
to the problem of depth-perception was incorrect. Experiments needed to be performed ')Utdoors.
environment. A hypothesis with a vast set
writer) began to assert itself - the possihility that there is ltera/iy no sucii thing
(iS a perception of space 14)IthOlIt the perception of a c')n tiflUOUS bach ground surThis hypothesis might be called
the t'air theory" which seemed to underlie the earlier research. A few experiments
were performed by the writer and his collaborators before the war ended using outdoor situations, photographs, and motion
should be conceived not as an object or an
array of objects in air but as a continuous
surface or an array of adjoining surfaces.
The spatial character of the visual world is
given not by the objects in it but by the
background of the objects. It is exemplified
by the fact that the airplane pilot's space,
paradoxical as it may seem, is determined
by the ground and the horizon, not by the
air through which he flies. This conception
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 2. The Look of the World from the Air
Instead of investigating the dierences in
perimenter is led to investigate the variations in stimulatiGn corresponding to a
and these will be explored in the ensuing
of perception will be considered, but not
in the order in which they were discovered and not under the usual headings.
If our scientific conception of space perception was inapplicable to aviation, what
space is actually inconsistent with a good
a better theory, never merely by contradictory facts" (24).
them at the outset. Their explanation and
factual status will be given in later chap-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
visual world are those o f surface (md edge.
discovered. They are elementary, however, not in the sense that atoms or units
in the sense in which a variable or quality
of something is essential to understanding
elementary impres sions of location assumed
by the traditional approach to space perSuch elements were arranged
from near to far according to the abstract
may account for visual space conceived as
may account for an outline or figure against
the backgroundthe Ufigureground phenomenon"and together vith the surface enclosed may account for the perception of
2 1 Tu ere is (1 IW(1 ys s on e varia hie in
stimulation (however difJicult it ma) be to
discover and isolate) ?1'IliC/l corresponds to
hypothesis says that even complex perceptual qualities must have stimuli. It is
an extension of the principle of psychophysical correspondence to visual perception-.-the principle which has served so
can be found for the impression of a surface. Probably it is ma textured retinal
image. A stimulus ought to be discoverable
also for the quality of distance or depth
retinal image, an increase or decrease, for
instance, in the density of the texture of
be discoverable for an edge or contour and
for the impression of depth at a contour.
Perhaps this is a jump or discontinuity in
variable with which some quality of experience may prove to be in correspondence is
the policy which underlies psychophysical
methods in psychology (40). It is the first
Some would argue that there is no real explanation of perception until the physiological mechanism s have been discovered,
but this is a matter of preference. There
stimulation as well as laws relating it to
physiological processes. Explanation is a
different levels of explanation. The level
psychophysical theory, not a physiological
The s ti)'ÎÌUÌlLS-L'ari(Zb!C u'i thin ti, e
retínal image to ioliicli a ¡)ropert of visual
space corrccponds need be Orti) a correl(ltt of that property, not a copy of t t.
three-dimensional physical world is projected optically, the slant and shape of its
surfaces undergo a mathematical transformation in the projection but that they
do not on this account vanish or disappear.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
gets into the eye. Almost the first principle the beginning student learns is
that nothing gets into the eye but light.
This third assumption can be sharpened by
saying that, in a special sense, the outer
edges of the world have correlates in the
retinal image specifically related to their
objective counterparts by a lawful trailsformation. If this is correct, the problem
of the restoration of the lost third dimension in perception is a false Noblem.
visual process to the effect that a retinal
()i(t1Lre iS transmitted to the brain by the
optic nerve. In a more sophisticated form
it is tempting even to the visual scientists,
although it leads to difficulties. According
to the first part of the hypothesis, however,
psychophysical correspondence since perception may be a correlate, not a copy, of
replica of the world nor a picture for the
it may prove easier to trace its specific
set of variables analogous to ¿lie variables
of physical energy. This says, in effect,
image can be considered a stimulus. It is
the most debatable and least developed of
configuration, order? Why is vision organized, structured, detailed, precise?
The greatest achievement in the theoretical struggle with this problem has been
Ge.stzlt Psychology ((7). An attempt will
he made iiI Chapter 5, however, to follow
a different theoretical path and to suggest
that a so-called pattern of stimuli is it
self a stimulus. The term pattern is vague
and unanalysed. The mathematical conception of order, as exemplified by the
and density of texture - are definable as
variations of adjacent order in the retinal
called ifl/U)fli ugen eit' or di(ferentiation of
the retinal ímage has mostly been carried
out under a different name and with quite
two parallel bars, the gap in a broken ring,
the impression of a single line, a grating
of dark and light bands, and the familiar
letters of the acuity test. It can be argued»
that these are artificial rather than natural
types of stimulation. An attempt to connect
patterned, or textured image will be made
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
visual world can be divided into two problems to be considered separately, first, the
world of useful and significant things to
The second is the more familiar world with
distorted and falsified by this fact. This
whereas the first kind can be called literal.
Before one can fully understand schematic perception one must understand literal
perception since it provides the fundamental repertory of impressions for all
experience. This is primarily a book about
secondarily a treatment of schematic perception. The discussion of the meaningful visual world is deferred until the enti
Although it is true that everyday perception tends to be selective, creative,
fleeting, inexact, generalized, stereotyped, and to have all the other defects so
commonly ascribed to it, the best hope of
i impressions of a substantial or spatial
i world is the psychophysical experiment. This is, essentially, a procedure
of isolating and then systematically varying a feature ofthe physical stimulus for
the study of perception (as distinguished
traditionally from sensation) there is every
reason to think that it can be applied (40).
perception. It involves searching for son-ic
feature of the physical stimulus with which
past for the study of perception is fundamentally different from that of the psychophysical experiment. lt was a policy of
correlations between the stimulus and the
dependent on stimulation but that perception is not, the policy of the experimenter
has been to isolate and study these disA favorite device for encrepancies.
for only a fraction of a second. The method
is one of "impoverishing" the stimulus, or
reducing the optimal conditions for literal
perception which characterize the psychophysical experiment. Brief exposure, low
illumination, many stimuli in succession,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
small part of it can be considered iii the
either discarded or redefined. The second
primarily dependent on stimulation rather
This li rotlesis contradicts the traditional
conception that, whereas sensation depends only on immediate stimulation, perception depends also on past stimulation,
neitlìer so novel nor so radical as it may
still possible to suppose that sensations
and perceptions were essentially different,
the discoveries of Gestalt psychology have
overthrown the logical basis for the distinction. The seemingly vast diiference
object has been slowly vanishing in recent
years. Instead of the doctrine that perThe
or dimensions of all experience, perceptual as well as sensory . Such variahies as the texture and slant of a surface are, no doubt, a far cry froiiì the
variables of hue, brightness, and saturation of color. Rut, if it is no longer to be
assumed that the mind constructs the surface out of bits of color, the ualitics of a
surface need to be analysed as the qualities of color were analysed many years
ago, and the first problem is to search for
variables of the retinal image with which
these qualities might prove to be in correspondence.
sensation and perception will be offered in
Chapter 3, a substitute intended to retain
what is verifiable in the classical distinction and eliminate what has been
either to color-impressions or to oecti mpress ions,
Introspection of the first sort yields an experience of the visual field. Introspection
of the second sort, called 'phenomenological," yields an experience of the visual
must be accounted for if we are to understand vision, but the latter is the subject
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Distinction between Sensation and Perception
having sensations. Sensations are supposed to be the raw material of human experience and perceptions the manufactured product. Sensations are only colors,
sounds, touches, odors, and tistes; objects and space depend upon perception.
A certain hue, a feeling of warmth, and a
smell of smoke are not things in themselves. Only when they are combined in
a perception do they mak?e us experience a
fire. The eyes furnish us with an array of
ordering, and uniting the sensations into
things and events. The play of light within the eye can give us color but not things.
Things are a product of a mental capacity
respectability that there is a temptation to
forget that it is only a theory. As a matter
of fact it is not consistent with a great
deal of accumulated evidence in psychology. It would be worth while to consider
Around the latter part of the seventeenth
our ideas instead of discovering them iiiìplanted in our minds by Cod. It follows,
his ideas for himself, and that he himself
is the best judge of their truth. The doctrine was given a special impetus by John
Ilurnaii L'nderstanding. The mind at birth
experience writes its record. If knowledge
could exist in mind only by way of sense,
it was obvious that the sensory capacities
of man needed to be carefully investigated.
Since vision was the principal sense, scholars began to concern therAselves with the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
knowledge, especial1y of three dimensional
senses, or the visual sense must be suppleinented in some way by the mind.
There must exist a special mental process
ass ociation and inference the alternative
would he a kind of intuitive understanding
retreat toward the dogma of innate ideas.
theory of perception which still underlies
account of perception was the visual third
as distinct from the world of sense, or, in
be "eterna1" as distinct from the play of
light within the eye ? Various criteria of
the visual reality of objects were described, such as maintaining their position despite eye movements and conforming with impressions of touch, but the
most obvious featares, and these it seemed
scholars understood that the eye can obtain an image of an object but cannot
sense the external object at a distance the object "itself." The paradox was
that the latteris nevertheless apprehended.
Imere arose among philosophers a dispute,
creations or constructions of the mind, then
they were mental objects. Physical objects either did not exist or, if they did,
were unknowable. 1f they were nevertheless known, the explanation must be
supernatural. A vast amount of intellectual
this type of controversy or to some means
appears to rest, in part at least, on the
conviction that such properties as distance and solidity cannot be sensed and
basis for such properties could be discovered in the retinal image, however, the
dilemma might collapse and the whole intellectual superstructure would fall with it.
that the percept is never completely determined by the physical stimulus. Instead, the percept is something essentially
contribution made by the observer hirnself. Perception goes beyond the stimuli
our organic equipment, tend to be the same
for all. Perceptions, however, are secondary and, depending on the peculiarities and past experience of the individual,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
plied to such abilities as the apprehension
of meaningto the understanding of lanWhen
facts which psychologists have accurnulated. Meanings do depend upon the past
history ¿f the individu1. 13ut when it is
objects and of the spatial eiironment, it
is less satisfactory. For the visual uorlds
of different observers are more alike than
they ought to be if the doctrite H'ere the
appear to react to the spatial environment
visual world is a contribution of the mind,
if the mind constructs the world for itself.
with the environment in which we actually
perceptions? Thy are the optical illusions
for the process of space perception is protracted, involved, and difficult. Even at the
risk of oversimplifying, however, its main
the problem. It is the hi'story of a controversy. On the one side, a group of
possible to intuition or innate ideas. Such
theories they considered mystical and not
way of understanding how this could occur.
they argued, are so immediate, simple, and
clear in our consciousness that thc' nust
be either intuitions which are fundamental
by space in this controversy, it is necessarv to remember the scientific conception
of the world which began to be current at
universe so logical and simple that it becarne the wonder of the age (85). The
facts of astronomy and physics were united
predictable from a, few simple laws. This
things only, space, time, and matter, and
1The writer follows the usage of Boring in
using the term empiricism as the alternative of
is the term employed by Gestalt psychologists.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
from these realities everything else could
matter varying in space with time, i.e. in
motion, and could therefore be analysed in
terms of grams, centimeters, and seconds.
noted, was empty Euclidean space, defined
coordinates. Inevitably, then, the problem
tury philosophers and the nineteenth century psychologists meant geometrical
psychologists' analysis of the problem and
dictated the terms in which theories could
divide up naturally into certain geometric
two dimensions: the bare characteristic of
space as being spread out. This corresponded to the plane of_theverttical aidd
-------------.-the aspect of location in two dimensions, or the localization of points in the
there was the aspect of depth br distance,
geometry. Extensity, location, shape, and
distance these were the primary constituents of visual space. They do not, it
space were perceived, including extensity.
This implied that a color sensation could
only be a spot or point of color, and that
elementary sensations. As thus conceived,
focused points of light in terms of which
consistent sensationalist. Another doctrine was to suppose that extensity was
sensed (or was an "attribute" of sensation) but that the location of points in the
extended field was not sensed and therefore had to he learned by experience. As
William James for example, although he did
sensation, did believe that a visual line
point sensations. As a last possibility, it
might have been assumed that all constituents of space were sensed. But
thevisual third dimension was and remained
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
explain. Keeping in mind these variations
explain the constituents of space without
assume that a visual field filled with pure
color, such as the blue sky, was a mosaic
tended by its very nature: that color simply
field filled with patches of different color,
however, was a different matter. This was
something like a space with objects in it
and to this the special process of perception might apply. Such a field possessed
order, arrangement, or pattern as we would
say today. But to the early psychologists
it seemed that the way to start analysing
it was not in terms of order but in terms
of location. How did the spots of different
color get their position or place in the extended field of view? If the position of all
points in the field could be perceived, they
reasoned, everything in the held could be
of points whose position could be defined
field. A local sign was the unique accompanirnent of every point in the field,
determining its position in the up-down and
could be separately localized, or pointed
own locality-characteristic distinguishing
it from every other point. The question which divided the empiricist and
the nativist was whether this differentiating
characteristic became associated with its
appropriate retinal point through exper¡ence or had been intrinsically connected
variations of opinion on this question need
for the learning of these locality-signs, in
general terms, was that each point on the
retina got associated with the movement of
the eye just necessary to bring its stimulus to the fovea. It was practice in
fixating points (or locating them with the
heory of their three-dimensional character.
Since the retinal image was two-dimensional, this seemed the most reasonable
p-rojecsed shape or, more specifically, the
projected shape as the object is commonly
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Black lines on a white background are not,
in actual fact, much like the edges and contours of objects in a visual field, but to
civilized vision they are good equivalents.
a shape must be a mosaic of such pointsensations associated with one another
during the course of past experiences with
that particular shape. A line, for instance,
An extended shape was an array of colored
only the most radical of empiricists were
explicit in believing that the sensations of
opinion was that color possessed extensity as an innate attribute. The formed
or shaped character of a t'piece" of extensity might, however, be learned even if
the extensity itself were not, and this is
what empirically-mindedpsychologists have
l3ut no one has yet demonstrated precisely
how such learning could occur, or has even
explained just why, if extensity is ari unlearned feature of experience, form should
or not we have to learn to perceive forms
has proved, over the years, to be not very
conclusive. One can study the behavior of
infants systematically and make inferences about their first visual perceptions.
But the evidence obtained cannot be interpreted as proof that at the outset they
either do or do not see shapes. The implication of the reactions which babies
first make to faces and other visual objects
sort incomprehensible to any adult: forms
or undiqerentiated from one another. These
terms do not mean that vision in the infant
is what adults would call blurred, or that
the contours and details of things appear
as they do in an out-of-focus photograph.
They can only suggest, not describe, what
the perceptions of the infant are probably
that the typical baby at 3 to 5 months can
from other things but not as distinguished
seeing of gross differences to the seeing of
fine differences. Whether this development
principally the result of the natural growth
known. In any event the learning process,
if it is that, is not like the learning of geo-
metry which proceeds logically from points
to lines to planes and thence to solids in a
visual field becomes progressively less determinate from the center to the periphery,
when the viewer fixates an obect of ¡nterest, a fact as true for adults as for
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
(ßy Life photographer 1/erben Gehr. Copyright Time, Inc.)
FIGURE 3. An Attempt to Represent the Vision of an Infant
without being optically out of focus; this
the photograph fails to convey. The evidence will be discussed in Chapter 11,
visual behavior, see A Gesell, F. L. hg, and
G. Bullis, Vision: Its Development in Infant
Toward the end of the nineteenth century a few psychologists began to em
phasize the fact that a form may be transe
posed on the retina, as the observer scri
Although the sensory elements differed, the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
therefore be independent of the anatomical
retinal points of the image and also independent of the color stimulation of the
points. lt must in fact be a "form-quality"
the color qualities of hue and brightness
and therefore incapable of being analysed
into sensations. Form, then, was something that fell into n'ither the category of
p!íE!ition nor sensation; itwas irreducible
but, unlike a sensation, it had no cornprehensible stimulus-equivalent in the
retinal image. What could be the stimulus
for a visual form? Either it must be a set
of point-stiriuli, and this was not easy to
conceivedeither as points or in sorne vague
way as formless and sizeless extents, the
world in perception, or, in the terms of the
philosophers, that we have knowledge of a
could the eye transmit on which such perception or knowledge could be based?
Considering the problem as one of Cartesian geometry, it seemed obvious that a
single eye could not yield any information
about the third dimension since the latter
consisted of the line of sight itself, i.e. a
line represented on the retina as a single
other point. There was nothing to indicate
that matter outside the eye. The data for
objective fixation-point so that there is a
by a sort of triangulation. The eyes might
line, or as a gunner does when he operates
a range-finder. The visual process in the
automatic reasoning not unlike the cornputing mechanisn of a range finder, which
can solve problems in trigonometry automatically. Helmholtz called the process
sensations which accompany the converging or diverging of the eyes according
as near or far points are fixated; the muscle
his "new theory of vision" on it in 1709.
pointed out (48), the words 'cue" and "clue"
have both been used to mean a kind of sensefact on which to base perception or behavior.
implies the touching off of sorne response, but
their meaning has never been clearly dis31n
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
He added co it the idea that sensations of
scientific history. It is not however, as
away as we can actually judge distance. The
a maximum limit at around fifteen feet and
zero limit at about fifty feet. For lack of a
planation of depth perception in the texto I
was discovered. In contrast with previous
theorizing based only on self-observation,
With a theory in mind, Wheatstone invented an optical device to test it, whicI
that the discrepancy between the two retina! images of an object on which the two
eyes converged was not simply the paradox
same thing?) but was a basis for perceiving
could draw pairs of geometric figures, one
for each eye, differing in various ways and
its appropriate retina. If alawful relationship could be established between the
L a cause ofçlepth-perception. Everyone who has looked at stereograms knows
parity should be thought of as a clue for
an interpretive perception of depth or as
depth immediately was not easy to decide. It was in any event a demonstrable
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
like the hypothetical sensations of convergence and accommodation, and its
discovery made the dogma of an innate intuition of space
data derived from convergence, accommodation, and above all from retinal disparity
were taken as the primary criteria for distance and depth and as the only discoverable basis for the perception of abstract
three-dimensional space. There did exist,
detecting the distance of things. Elf one
seem to converge, they must really recede; and if objects known to be of similar
size seem progressively smaller, they must
blurred it must be distant like the hills
on the horizon. If an object is partly in
cannot be flat but must really be curved or
other things in proportion to its relative
long before the perception of distance ever
in their effort to reproduce a segment of the
world on a fiat surface. When the philosophers and psychologists began to examine their visual sensations they inevitably began to view the world pictonally, as artists had learned to do, and
that could be ascribed to convergence and
selves perceptions, it appeared, not data
of sensation; even the most convinced nativist could not argue that they were pure
primary cues of convergence, accommodation and retinal disparity. Since they did
CUeS, while convergence and disparity were
by successive generations of curious men,
as facts having to do with the perception
of space, they have never been systematically controlled, varied, and subjected to
and their significance may then appear in
of our perception of the world has proved,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
fected it, more convincing than the alter..
native theories. Complicated as it is, it
did keep operi the possibility' of investiga»
two different things and that all knowledge
the sense organs, or the "information" or
imply a set of clues and a process of interpretation. The_mind, it was assumed,
intelligent and acts on the sensatons somewhat as a geometer or a logicianwould act, combining, computing, and
comprehending the data it gets in much the
same way as did the philosophers themselves when they invented the theory.
intuitive, it had to be a kind of compounding or putting together of elementary sens ationS by means of associative learning.
be specified. They could hardly be points
of color corresponding to the single spots
of excitation on the retina since, after all,
points are nothing but geometric fictions;
cçver how they could plausibly be any'thig else. Furthermóre, the theory
we see the world, or why it looks the way
it does, but only how we can make judgments about the world. Both of these
Instead of simply adding a "form-quality"
to the list of sensations, however, it took
a new line of thought and asserted that a
all. Experience is not reducible to elements or additive units, the argument went,
But if not constituted of sensations, how
is a unitary perception of this sort to be
Observing that under experimental conditions visual patterns or dimly seen forms
even though the drawings presented to the
these tendencies were laws of the perceptuai process in general and were indicative
spontaneously in perception even when the
was objectively incoherent and meaningless. The theory of perception which occurred to them was that the process was
organization. The process of organization w
itself, and the parts of the field (the contour of the form and its background) were
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
united or separated by forces of attraction
and repulsion similar to electro-magnetìc
and only then do they unite in a Gestalt.
that all visual perception is tridimensional
from the outset. The theory of perception
as organization led to the following reasoning.
itself, then, would naturally be threedimensional if the underlying ph siological
event, this was about as far as theGestalt
field forces which might underlie binocular
they were trying to explain, they forirulated problems for space-perception
have very nearly their true size and color
the nineteenth century psychologists, and
questions about the characteristics of the
psychologists represented was respcnsib1e
for more than a new theory of perception;
it resulted in a massive amount of experimental evidence. An important part of this
meant the fact that perceptions, or phenomenai objects, kept their identity and their
variations in the retinal images with which
was meaningful in terms of human behavior
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
longer a speculative question of epistemology but a matter for experimental investigation. In a size-constancy experiment,
equate the size of a wooden stick near at
of the retinal image of the far stick, however, may be only a quarter or an eighth
that of the near stick, the rule of optics
on what can it depend? A reasonable answer would be that it depends on the whole
stimulating situation or, more specifically,
on the stick-image in relation to its background-image of three-dimensional space.
next chapter: that there eiist, as extremes,
two kinds of seeing, (1) the experience of a visual world in which objects
and (2) the experience of a visual field in
corollary of the visible depth and distance of the visual world.
counterparts in stimulation, it is necessary
to assume that the latter are in some way
is the problem of perception. Our awareness of the world of objects and space is
particularly difficult ¡o account for but
also particularly important, since it permeates nearly all kinds of experience.
Theories of the perception of objects and
intuitive or innate. Empiricism explained
the synthesis as learned or inferred from
The difficulty in postulating a consistent
learning theory is that many kinds of perception seem to occur in children and animais who have had no opportunity to learn.
term, appears to fit these facts somewhat
better. If it is necessary to assume some
theory of what might go on in the nervous
valuable. It is true that physical and biological processes are often characterized
by organization (the tendency of electric
the whole during the growth of the embryo)
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
itself explain why a perception is like its
object. The characteristic of perception is
that the result is not so much spontaneous
as it is faithful to the thing perceived.
the spontaneous character of the process of
between retinal stimulation and our awareness of things. Koffka, in his Principles
stimulation" (67, p. 96) and implied that
a direct explanation of this comprehensive
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Apparent Size and Distance of After.lmages
The Effect of the Posture of the Head and
The Visual Field during Movement of the Observer
and walls, with an array of familiar objects at definite locations and distances.
Every part of it is fixed relative to every
there beyond is an extended environment of
ground and buildings or, if you are lucky,
solid objects look solid, square object-s
looks as big as the book lying in front of
insofar as you can, as if it consisted of
vided up by contours. [To do so, you must
why the visual world looks as it does the
first thing to do is to look at it. What ac
and then find the essential terms in which
be carried out without preconceptions and
vision may be kept in mind, but the known
theories and their implicit terms should be
disregarded. The problem is to state without any theoretical prejudgment what we
Try making this observation for yourself.
you see a perfectly stable scene of floor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
and then pay attention not to that point,
what you can see, keeping your eyes still
observe that it has characteristics somewhat different from the former scene.
The fact that it differs from the familiar
visual world is the source of a great deal
vision. It is the experience on which the
lt is strictly an introspective or analytic
phenomenon. One gets it only by trying to
see the visual world in perspective and to
field are products of the familiar but still
properly functioning eye. But the differences between them are so treat as to
without special apparatus, and the reader
should therefore check them for himself as
) In the first place, the visual field has
none.' If you keep your eyes. fixed but put
your attention on the periphery of the field
to a limited angle out to the right and left
and to an even more limited angle upwards and downwards. fthese boundaries
it is true, are not sharp 'lTkè the margins of
a picture and they are hard to notice, since
regions, but they are nevertheless present.
If you close one eye you will notice that
realize that his nose is represented in his
it has always been there and its discovery only illustrates the unfamiliarity of
What Ernst Mach, analyzing his serisatioris, called the phenomenal ego is illustrated in Figure 5. It is a literal representatjon of his visual field, with his right
eye closed, as he reclined in a nineteenth
not see them in detail without moving his
the drawing; actually it is the center of
the field and this should be the only part
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FiGURE 5. The Monocular Visual Field of Ernst Mach
visibly continuous. As Koffka has pointed
out (67), one is ordinarily aware of a world
for the full 360°, in contrast to the visual
or not is a question of definition rather
than a matter of ordinary observation. It
experienced world one finds oneself inspecting the visual field instead. The
It is at least clear that the visual world
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
fleldis that it is sharp, clear, and fully
detailed at the center, but progressively
to those out toward the periphery. So difficult are the latter to see that the impulse
to turn the eyes and fixate them may seem
eyes down this page of print, for example,
and fixate at random one letter of a single
word, you will probably find that you can
perceive that word and the words adjacent
to it on the right and left and above and
therefore, possesses a central-to-penpheal gradient of clarity. The visual
center, which agrees with the fact that it
1To the reader familiar with Koffka's distinction between the "behavioral world" and
the "geographical world" (67), it should now
be clear that his is a quite different distinction
from the one now being made. The "behavioral
world" for Koffka was the whole field of visual
experience. The point of this chapter is that
visual experience needs to be subdivided into
a bounded or field-like kind of experience and
an unbounded or world-like kind of experience.
The "geographical world" was Koffka's name
for the physical environment. That there is a
physical environment, neither Koffka nor the
writer nor, presumably, the reader doubts.
It should also be clear that the visual field
as here defined is not the same thing as the
"phenomenal field" as this term is employed
ordinarily perceived by scanning, that is,
point, and the objects and surfaces which
compose it are always clear and fully detailed. If the objection be advanced that
u'/ien fixated, the answer ¡s that the objector gets this fact from an inspection of
eyes are moved from one fixation point to
Scanning movements of this sort are termed
jerks of very brief duration. If the shifts
in the same direction as the eyes and, as
field formed by the eyelids and nose sweep
by many writers, or the kind of field conceived
by what is called "field-theory." These latter
usages fail to distinguish between the de-
limited and the panoramic kind of experience.
The distinction here being made is, however,
similar to Brunswik's conception of two kinds
of perceptual achievements, the seeing of
"perspectives" and the seeing of "constants"
of the retina best equipped anatomically for
discrìmination of fine detail and on which is
projected an image of the object toward which
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
head (the result of either a voluntary turning
of the head ora passive rotation of the head)
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
you will stand in the middle of the room,
close one eye, and turn around or walk in
circles, you can observe the way in which
,øo e of the most obvious characteristics
of the visual world is its stabi1ity."Ìhe
(you would become badly disoriented if it
did) nor does it shoot from side to side or
yet it is really a very astonishing fact.
an external frame of reference which seems unexplainable on the
basis of the retinal picture. Try the following experiment: with one eye closed,
select some prominent object and then look
alternately toward a point just to the right
of it and another point just to the left of ìt.
you will to see it as a patch of color which
side of your visual field, you will probably
side to the other of your field, if you concentrate on the boundaries, but you will
and put your finger at the outer corner of
your open eye so that you can feel the eyeball under the lid. Press on the eyeball
placement of the retinal image across the
retina proper bu t there has been quite a
different result in perception. This result
must be due to the difference between the
colored surfaces of the visual field appear
not to move. But there is another type of
natural eye movement, the pursuit movement, in which it makes a difference
whether the world or the field is attended
fixate it, and move it slowly from right to
left. Looking at the situation as objectively as possible, the motion that you see
but attend to the background, the motion of
pictorially, or as a field, the illusion of a
Another way of demonstrating the directional stability of the visual world despite
time showing that there is another directional system for vision with respect to
location of after-images. Nearly everyone
eyes" or other so-called entoptic phenoSuch phenomena are forms of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
they are not projected by light from outside the eye, they are not displaced on
the objects of the visual world but flot to
clear vision and the boundaries of the field.
negative after-image, and it will reappear
with reference to the visual field. Insofar
as they have a visible location, it is in this
located in the visual world, which possesses its own independent directional system.
Hence, if one attends to the visual field in
eyes an object(as a patch of color) appears
attending to is the visual world the afterimage appears to be displaced.
field, not in the visual world, with respect
superposed on whatever surface one happens to be looking at and to be at the dis-
therefore, after-images do have a certain
kind of location in the visual world. They
This fact has avery interesting corollary,
whichwill have a special significance when
we come to consider the perceived size of
objects in the visual world. The apparent
The seen size is very nearly proportional
to the seen distance, a relationship known
as Emmert's Law. It suggests that the impression of size must be closely linked
course, the size of the after-excitation on
after-image against one's closed eyes, or
in absolute darkness, or against the cloudless sky, it seems to float in what might
be called an indefinite space. It does flot
There is still another effect of the observer's movement on his visual field
your field rotates and you may be able to
still upright and that the lines where the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
it had been tilted over on its side, but the
room as a room is still upright. The pictonal direction "downwards" goes one way
somehow implicit in all such tilted visual
fields (when they result from a voluntarily
tilted or reclining posture) and it is never
There are, it is true, a number of situations ìn which this sense of the gravitational vertical for the visual world is
temporarily lost, and there are diseases usually of the organs of equilibrium in the
inner ear - in rhjch it is permanently impaired.
amusement park devices, in a special type
of vertigo, and in a number of experimental
visual field cannot be distinguished from
may then dominate perception. The experience is disconcerting and unpleasant.
In the activities of ordinary behavior we
may infer that there is a visual verticalaQd-horìzontal frame of reference which is
linked to gravity and is presumably mediated by the muscle sense and the inner
there are also other systems or frames of
reference, linked to the boundaries of the
field of view, or to the axes of the head
or body, or to the lines of the visual field,
which may be in conflict with the physical
but not in all conditions, such a field has
the visual world and the visual field with
already described, but they are more important for our central problem. The field
be defined by mathematics and optics. The
essential physical fact about a picture is
that it consists of a projection of objects
can be seen as a picture, therefore, it will
have the characteristics of a projection.
Keeping this fact in mind, let us compare
as upon the attitude of the observer, but
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
to be preserved under the natural conditions of attending to the visual world.
see it from the front, the side, or the top,
if the conditions for observation are ade
there are two meanings for the word shape.
is also a more common meaning of the term,
projected on a plane. This is its shape as
fined by the outlines or contour. This is
object which remains constant from whatever direction it is viewed is its depth
lt is obviously important to specify which
one talks about shape, and a good deal of
confusion has resulted from not doing so.
whereas the visual field contains projected
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
can, first of all, observe that objects do
not change shape in the first sense of the
not,,e that the projected shapes do change,
especially if you fixate an object as you
It so happens that most of the controlled
flat objects (whose depth shapes are apshapes.
they are best viewed. The example frequently given is a dinner plate. When the
of such a stimulus object tends to remain
line of regard, it is not clear whether the
edge, arid it is perceived as such in any
projected shape. Strictly speaking, it is
depth shape, there is room for argument as
statement that a dinner plate always looks
All of us have observed the fact of linear
structures appear to get closer together,
after a fashion, as they recede in the distance. When looking down a highway or
railroad tracks the effect is strong; when
looking at a building or observing the intenor of a room it is less obvious and may
be difficult to note. Even in the case of
the railroad tracks, however, two observers may differ in describing what they see.
definitely converge as they go off toward
the horizon; another will insist that the
visibly equidistant. Each scene is perfectly clear to each observer, but they are
contradictory to each other. Now this fact
does not- in the least prove that each observer creates the visual scenein his own
be two kinds of seeing. Perhaps both observers are correct, but are simply using
the verb ettO see" with different meanings.
If you lay a sheet of paper on a table in
and left hand edges, you will probably not
one eye and try it again. Unless you have
been trained to visualize things in perspective, the sides of the paper will still
tend to remain stubbornly parallel. But if
you take a pencil in either hand and, with
one eye still closed, hold them perpendicular to your line of sight and then align
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
(By Life photographer herbert Gehr. Copyright Time, ¡nc.
FIGURE 8. Convergence of Parallel Lines to
them with the edges of the paper, you will
do converge when projected on an imaginary
pencils in position, try to visualize the
until they intersect. They meet at a point
exactly at eye level, that is, on the horizon. 1f you note where this point ¡s super
that it is where the wall would be cut by
of the visual field as approximating a plane
projection. On such a projection parallel
eye-level, if they are parallel to the ground.
On the other hand it should be clear that
that parallel lines do not meet. Euclid's
the environment as a Euclidean scene, not
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
R. Ware, Modern Perspective (IV. Y., Macmillan, 1900)
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
ment, the points of fixation are the obects
in it. These are the elements which arouse
we are almost unaware of their existence.
But a little attention to the visual field
truly parts of it as the areas representing
objects. In the field as a projection, the
background is not different from the objects
in the compelling way it is when you observe the world. The interspaces, like
Con you see two pencils in the photograph? The hidden pencil has on uninterrupted contour, and you might suppose, therefore, that ¡t would be easier to see than the visible
pencil. Its contour however is nearly all "used up" by the two pamphlets, and the pencil
becomes port of the background, merely an "interspace." (The photograph was devised b
Ii,. Metzger and reproduced in Gesetze des Sehens. Frankfurt am Main: Kramer, 1936)
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
ance of an irregular patchwork. Con sider
psychologists, beginning with the work of
Rubin on what he called figure and ground
divide up neatly into figures and background. In most of them it is a relative
as a figure or as a background. One object may be the background for another
perception of space and the most cornprehensive of backgrounds, as we shall
lies in front of it. Seen as a field, with
described as eclipsing the other, to use an
astronomical term. Seen as a world, however, one object lies in front of another.
not appear superposed at all; and in some
reverses the suggestion of depth. A possible explanation of this will be given at
between the extreme cases of adjacent areas and superimposed areas, and a number
of factors play a part in determining how
these will be seen. It is clear that even
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tend to be seen in superposition under the
streets, and countryside, the actual fact is
Koffka once argued convincingly that there
although this statement seemed to violate
accepted principles of vision. If the statement seems dubious, the reader may try it
picture upside down and fixating it. What
you now see is a fairly good example of a
slant, recede, and lie behind one another
It has been emphasized that in the ordinary vision of everyday life any long
continued fixation of the eyes is a rarity.
It is equally rare to perceive the environment with the head motionless. If
the observer is not involved in some kind
length of time is a difficult and unnatural
effect is not a sweeping shift such as occurs when the eyes alone move, but is
rather a change in the pattern of projected
and distortions of one's image in amusement-park mirrors. If you fixate a nearby
way in which the edges in your field move
superposition of one object on another is
from side to side, the projected shapes of
earlier. These are actually only incomplete descriptions of a much more general
that the visual field is ordinarily alive
eye movements (that is generally invisible
in any case), but the kind of relative displacement which goes with head movemeats.
in the environment. We have already noted
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
space in general remains equally constant
driver of an automobile would face a very
field should be noted. lt is never flat, like
a surface on which a picture is painted or
depthless. Nor is it lacking in the character of being outside of us, in externality.
Nevertheless, it bas less of these qualities than the visual world. The depth of
visible as its breadth and its height. But
prolonged fixation. It is lessened further
if you then attend not to that point but to
the hazy margins of the field and the pattern of shapes there. It is also reduced by
tricks such as looking at the environment
as to invert the field. The impression of
of the visual field has now been described
in a number of ways. The field differs from
tonal seeing, then, differs astonishingly
The field can change in its direction-fromhere but the world does not. The field is
oriented with reference to its margins, the
world with reference to gravity. The field
is a scene in perspective while the world
another while the forms in the field approximate being depthless. In the field,
these shapes are deformed during locomotion, as is the whole field itself, whereas
It has the ring of familiarity to say that
the traditional theory examined in the last
chapter. It is also plausible to say that
although the visual field is seen the visual
world is only known. But this also involves a doctrine of perception which is
the sense that one can bring back the world
be agreement that the visual world is marvelously well adapted to be the conscious
accompaniment of behavior, while the field
is not. If we adjusted our actions to some
of the peculiarities of the visual field, we
should go badly astray; thuswhen, because
of fog or darkness, the environment is not
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the traditional distinction between visual
sensation and visual perception. Is it not
possible to relinquish the latter distinction
favor of a description of our experiencewhen-we-introspect, that is, the field, and
see when we say that we perceive the environment has turned out to be neither
short nor simple. But this lengthy exercise in introspection has served a purpose. It leads to a better understanding
of the problem with which we started. The
less than the visual world will be complete.
The visual field, as the next chapter will
the retinal image. Therefore, the explanation of pictorial seeing is possible on
traditional lines. The theories of vision,
generally speaking, have been theories of
the visual field, but this type of explanation is insufficient. What is required is a
visual world as the end-product of perception is unorthodox.
vision, almost from its beginning, has emphasized the errors and inadequacies of
visual world has emphasized just the opposite. It may strike the reader as naive
to assume that visual perception corresponds to its object when everybody
assume the correspondence of perceptions to physical objects: that would indeed be naive. But on the other hand, we
may and should consider what correspondence there is, for this is what needs exThe discrepancies between
perceptS and objects are not difficult to
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
and the Excitation of the Retinal Mosaic . . .
The Retinal Excitation as an Anatomical Pattern and
nature of the optical process or at least
a comfortable feeling that it is known by
is that a picture is formed on the retina of
each eye. Everybody knows what a picture is; hardly anything could he more
familiar. It is therefore easy to rest content with no more of an explanation than
that, or simply to assume that the retinal
fallacy of this explanation for perception,
if not already evident, will become clear
would be more useful first to examine the
way in which the retinal picture is produced.
If we are to understand visual perception we must begin where perception
begins: with physical objects, light, and
the eye. fI'here is no doubt about the fact
that all vision, both the pictorial kind and
the objective kind, is dependent on light
rays and on the formation of images within
the eyes. The discovery of how light behaves and how images are produced
laws of optics is one of the most brilliant
culminating accomplishment of these discoveries was the publication of a famous
treatise on physiological optics in 1866 by
The intricate and precise series of events
in the physical world and in the human eye
which make seeing possible were so accurately described by Helmholtz that there
have been few men who could make any important additions to oui knowledge about
How is the material environment projected as an image, and how can this
by which animals obtain an image are ex44
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tremely useful since ¡mages enable them to
organism can get about in the environment
those facts will be considered which contribute to an understanding of perception.
number of stages, and we shall take these
material world, as we all know, is made up
fact, a great part of it consists of earth,
water, and air. The first two of these but not the last - possess surfaces. The
invariably horizontal. Surfaces are extremely important for our perception of the
The surfaces of objects reflect light, if
they are illuminated, and this fact is the
light but transmits it; most objects reflect
world differ with respect to their structure
or less of the light falling on it and it
differential reflection is the physica(7t
to these simple differences in reflectivity
differences produced by the structure of a
surface. We have names for these denoting
kind of surface reflects light in a particular
the world radiates freely through air but
t1ot through other surfaces, most of which
considered analytically to consist of rays
which travel in straight lines. Any given
point in the open air, therefore, will be
the juncture of rays from every surface of
by another surface at that point. If an eye
is stationed at such a point, light from a
pupil, although this light is only minute
portion of the sum of all the light being
(Only the rays intercepted by the eye are
eyes taken together, the array of surfaces represented in the incoming cone
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
image on its rearward surface, the retina.
bending of their paths, in transparent sub'
stances. 1J'he forepart of the eye is an ex
instead of reflecting it. The behavior of
called lenses, is to produce a convergence, instead of a continued radiation,
move from one point of fixation to another.
the eyes play oyçr the. çnvirQneflt like a
searchlight, with the difference that they
absorb light from the constant flux of rays
in the air about them instead of emitting it.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
exists a correspondence between reflecting
flected at each external point is duplicated
are an infinite number of reflecting points j
on a given surface, and the same is true of
the corresponding focus points in the image
periment of the pinhole camera. If light is
made to pass through a very small hole it
behaves like straight lines intersecting at
term, and defines a projective correspondence. The essential fact about the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
surfaces whose reflected light reaches the
pupil. Ari illustration of this projection
looking at the wall of the room in front of
him, and his visual field includes part of
solid lines; all others are given in dotted
lines. The environment outside the visual
field is indicated by shading. The straight
lines from the surfaces to the retina represent focused pencils of light which
rays of light actually shown in the drawing
axe those from the edges of physical surfaces which, it will be argued, have a
of the world at different distances will be
true, but with a normal eye there is very
image is inverted and the order within the
image therefore reversed, it nevertheless
throughout this book) is that for certain
purposes we may treat the retinal image as
if it were a two-dimensional pinhole image.
It is important to note that this is not the
and used in the design of optical instruments, for this latter is three-dimensional.
eye of an albino rabbii is fixed into a hole
which has led to the theory that the retinal
substances used in photographic emulsions, these are capable of reacting dif.
ferentially to the energy and wave length
of light. They are superior to any photographic emulsion, however, since they are
though the television camera can register
an image continuously and in this respect
is more like the retina, its mechanism is
quite different. The cells of the retina are
center of the retina than in the periphery,
grading off from a density of 160,000 per
fovea.1 Both rods and cones are wholly absent in a small peripheral area where the
1The distribution of rods is quite different
from the distribution of cones. The fovea contains only cones whereas in the peripheral retina rods predominate over cones. The decrease in
visual acuity toward the periphery is probably
related to the decrease in density of receptor
cells and to the fact that the foveal cones have
individual neurons while the peripheral rods
outer edge of the retina there appear to be more
than a thousand cells per square millimeter.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Note the different types of cells (neurons) and the variety of
relationships and interconnect,ons of their tips (synapses).
The lower edge of the figure represents the layers lying foward the interior of the eyebaH; the top edge shows the
long, narrow rods and the shorter, thicker Cniies, which
point outward away from the interior of the eyeball. Light
admitted into the eye through pupil, lens, etc,, has to pass
through layers 10, 9, 8 etc., before falling upon the sensitive tips of rods and cones in sayers 2cx and i. (Prom S. L.
Polyak, The Retina, L niversity of Chicago /rp,cs, 1Q41.
The nature of their differential reactions to
without, until recently, any close approach
photo-chemical reaction which corresponds
to wave length is particularly puzzling, as
the various theories of color vision bear
mosaic do react specifically to the charac.
the surfaces from which the light was reflected. Another fact is equally certain,
that they are connected with the individual
fibers of the optic nerve, although not in a
retina, when they are stimulated by light,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
quarter of a million or so in number, which
we call the optic nerve. So far as the evi
travel their paths separately. Very little
fibers can, it is true, be traced. Some of
regulation of the size of the pupil, and the
area on the surface of the occipital lobes
of the brain. The excitation of this cortical area is probTy essential to all vision
blindness just as much as would injury to
the eye or severing of the optic nerve. It
projected on the retina. But the anafacts provide only a puzzling and
very incomplete support for this assumption (6). Lateral connections exist among
adjacent fibers both in the retina itself and
at later stages in the tract between retina
were such a thing) would be very blurred.
In all probability, it should not be thought
not of light, but of nerve-cell discharges,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 18. The Sequence of Transformations in the Process of Visual Perception
The physical environment: a wedge-shaped physical oblect, reflecting hght. B. A
"picture" of the physical environment: a plane projection of the light reflected from the
physical object. C. The reflnal ¡mage (the proximal stimulus for vision): a curved proection of the light reflected from the physical object. D. The pattern of excitation: a
mosaic of photosensitive receptors. E. The brain process: a bifurcated and oddly-shaped
projection of excitations on the rear surfaces of the hemispheres. F. The visual world,
or phenomenal experience: the experience of a wedge-shaped object. G. The visual field,
or the color-sensations obtained by introspection: the impression of two fjot patches of
Sensitive electrodes placed upon the cortex might pick up regions of high and low
activity with gradients or contours between
one yet has an adequate conception of it.
Vision. All that is certain about the last
stage of visual perception can be put into
neural processes at the occipital surface
of the brain. These processes arouse still
others. They are almost unknown.2 Nevertheless, these unknown events are the
sole basis of our visual experience of the
2There are, to be sure, a number of 4established facts about the processes within
the brain which correlate with visual perception, and more are continually being established. The facts are, however, as yet
PUZzling and incoherent, or at least they seem
so to the writer. The study of visual brainprocesses is being pursued by Kohier (69) and
others (66, 50). The possibility of reaching
principles of explanation at the psychophysical
level without knowing the principles at the
psychophysiological level has already been
even be wholly cortical. Certain mammals are
vision persisting after the extirpation of the
condition is true in any degree for man is not
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
conscious resultant. This is what psycho'
logists have been doing with color stimuli,
sound stimuli, and others for more than a
hundjed years, and the results of this endeavor have produced the most securely
established body of facts known to psychology. lt is traditionally known as psychophysics. A retinal spot of light having a
wave length of 760 millionths of a mulimeter yields a visual spot of the quality
per second in the ear produces the quality
which arouse them, as indeed they must if
to his environment. This is the principle
and nervous basis, the rule is that variations in stimuli are co-ordered with variations in the character of the perceptions.
Musical tones, for example, are related to
the frequency of air vibrations in much the
same way that the letters of the alphabet
are related to the number series from i to
26. This rule has never failed of verification for stimuli which can be ordered in
vision are, of course, the physical variaar i wave
._--_--. .-.. tsityl By combinations of these, and
by mixtures of wave lengths, all the experienced qualities of pure color and
accounted for. If our environment consisted of nothing more than a homogeneous
sea of light, without surfaces or objects,
specified in terms of these variables with
this. The stimulus situation for a typical
are projected in the retinal image. There
stimulus variable in the image. The locus
of the classical stimulus variables is the
not related to this kind of variation within
instead to variations among the different
The facts of the situation are represented in Figure 15 . The array of physical
duplicated in the image is shown in solid
lines. As projected, these surfaces border
dark brown and the table is light gray, the
color stimulation in the image will shift
two parts of the image. The image, therefore, is made up of areas of different lightcharacter, and it is the transitions between
these areas which give rise to visual lines
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
or contours. In the illustration, the pen
cils of light from an edge to its corresponding border in the image are represented by straight lines.
specific representation in the image. The
minute structure (if the lens of the eye is
accommodated for that surface), are projected as correlated irregularities in the
for example, is focused as a dark spot, a
slight protuberance as a minute high light,
type of stimulation gives rise to what we
will call the quality of visual texture. It
Metzger (81) and others that texture is what
color. It may be noted that physical things
like clear sky, dense fog, and regions of
does, do not possess texture, and are not
two fundamental types of stimulus variation, one in the character of the focused
light at any point and another in the telation of these light-points to one another.
stimulus quality and intensity; the second
Color-points, and it may vary either in the
color of the points or in their arrangement.
Terms like distribution, pattern, and arrangement are not very exact, it must be
this variable. It is evident, however, that
about is simply that of adjacent order on
the retinal mosaic. A transitional arrangea
ment of color-points yields a line or conAn alternating or scattered artour.
arrangement of focused light on a physical
surface of two dimensions which is specifIc to an array of reflected light from
specific to the objects and surfaces thern
selves, the image is also specific to them.
Geometrically, we say that the image is a
is that the image is not a replica of the
world. If taken seriously this conclusion
more than one meaning. It may refer to an
the Bible - or it may refer to the projected
two meanings of the term are easily confused and there may be intermediate
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
in the image but a correlate. The fact is
that the optical image does not have to be
of the environment it is at least a representation of it. The apparent simplicity of this pictorial analogy for vision
makes us reluctant to give it up, scientists
as a representation of something is nothing
if it is not presented to an eye. An unseen
picture is only an arrangement of pigment
spots, if it is a painting, or ari arrangement
of metallic grains of silver, if it is a photograph. It is simply a part of the material
world which has to be seen, like anything
picture there would have to be another eye
sitting in the brain and looking at them.
thought of as a picture or a representation
and its correlate. There is no counterpart
character which gives a surface its particujar hue, but there is a correlate, wave
length. There is not a counterpart in the
in the image for the shape of an object in
three dimensions, or what has been called
Similarly there is no copy in the image of
the solidity and distance of the environment in general, but there must be some
correlates for these variables, or we could
not see them. Finally, the size-relations
of the objects in the environment and the
laws of perspective, are not copied in the
image. But for these and the other features
material environment for which the retinal
would consist of a large picture at right
angles to the line of sight and filling the
perspective draftsman at a fixed position
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
picture. It has been illustrated in Figure
being that the image would be upside down
relative to the picture. Such an environment, of course, never existed. But most
the fundamental kind of seeing is "pictonal seeing," or the perception of a
the duplication theory of the retinal image.
Perhaps these facts provide the explanation of its persistent hold on our thinking
image on the retina and the excitation of
if our reasoning is not to go astray' lt is
thing. But the former, clearly, is a matter
of physics while the latter is a matter of
of light-points while the excitation is an
arrangement of discharging nervous eleof the
-- .. .- ,.-..,----.--may be noted, together with the
rays of light which explain the correspondence to the world, are pure geometrical
fictionntroduced for purposes of analysis, whèrèas'tFie Individual spots of 'the
dense - in the center of the retina where
imae is an event in the light-flux of the
for instance, when the head is tilted and
to the retina itself, is.ø a pattern composed
When the eye moves, the image is transposed on the surface of the retina and consequently there ¡s a shift in the pattern of
excited elements in the anatomical mosaic
stimulus for vision? The pattern of excil
of units of finite size, correlative with
to the immediate basis of visual perception as our present knowledge will take
us, so it needs to be examined with care.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
view it is composed of nervous excitations in a purely ordinal relation to one
one has seen electric signs, consisting of
a mosaic of light bulbs wired to a corresponding set of contacts, of such a sort
that any number of patterns can be lighted
some of these signs the patterns of lighted
that words or figures will move across it.
which light up. This would be an anatomiBut a moving pattern can
best be defined by specifying not contacts
ordinal pattern. In other words the pattern can legitimately be thought of as
bulbs. Likewise the pattern of excitation
an anatomical meaning; the latter pattern is nor embodied in. this way but
pattern, therefote, is preserved when the
eye moves although the anatomical pattern undergoes a complete rearrangement.
react to an ordinal pattern as well as to
transposable pattern - why not the eye of
the ordinal type of stimulation more exactly
For the present, it is enough to emphasize the fact that the identity of a given
all on the anatoiìica1 point of the retina
stimulated but entirely on the position of
that point relative to other points of stirnulation.
re t in (2 i im a e i s ti, e s a ni e s ot (i t di fie re n t
i n s t an ts (i f i in e i /1 e n i t s p o s i t i o n re la t i ve
,,/!en its f)OSitOfl relative to the retina is
light is a stimulus for perception by virtue
of its ordinal location and not by virtue of
its anatomical location, can be illustrated
spots in an otherwise blank field of view,
the principle holds. Let a, b, and c represent three separated retinal points in a
briefly and a moment later points b and c
server sees is a pair of spots which move
toward the right. The identity of the anatomical point b with itself is not sensed.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
another is what is sensed; the relation of
either spot to the retina is not apprehended
out and elaborated by Ternus early in the
translated in 32) and it illustrates their
main contribution to the science of vision
the "parts" of a perception exist only in
Visual Experience and the Retinal Pattern
kinds of seeing described in the previous
world, and we can assess their correspondence or non-correspondence with the
ways the visual field corresponds with the
finely differentiated at the center of clear
vision and becomes progressively less determinate away from the center; this reulects the dense distribution of cells at
thinning Out toward the periphery. It has
passes out of the visual field corresponds
to an object which ceases to project rays
easily be accounted for in these respects.
clear in all its parts. Only the suggestion
given here and the answer is therefore in
certain, however, that the visual world is
seen as the result of a single fixation or a
momentary visual field. It must correspond,
citations on the retina, united perhaps by a
visual world, therefore, must be what has
been called the ordinal pattern of excitation rather than the anatomical pattern. If
it be assumed that there is an ordinal pattérn which keeps its integrity during eye
part of it to be brought to the center of the
detail. A complex of this sort, over time,
would be both uniformly differentiated and
but the vìsual world does noti, It was made
clear in Chapter 3 that the visual fields be.
different. The first array of color patches
This fact is parallel to the rearrangement
that the field corresponds specifically to
is not rearranged after a change of fixa-e
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
based on the ordinal pattern of excitation
appearance of after-images? if a negative
after»image is a patch of excitation in the
anatomical pattern, that is, one which is
visual field. It should, in other words, ap
pear wherever we turn our eyes, and this is
to vary its location with reference to the
difference between them is highly significant for the theory of vision. The former reminds us that stimulation of a
anatomical pattern and the ordinal pattern
provide correlates. But there remains the
most important of all the differences between the visual field and the visual
character of the world. The psychological
depth-shapes, and that it tends to have an
perspecti ve rather than the laws of Eudid, is in agreement with the physical
the horizon really look like the world at a
very great distance and not like a line at
in the visual field is consistent with the
projected character of the retitial stimulation, but what about the "seeing behind"
puzzling fact that the world, and the field
this fact remains in need of explanation.
The effort to find such an explanation will
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Abstract Space and the World of the Flier
for Distance as Stimulation Gradients ....
became a practical problem almost overnight. The skills of aviation began to be
of vital interest to millions of individuals.
theory of the binocular and the monocular
looking at points of color in a visual field;
the horizon, the landing field, the direction of his glide, not to mention several
land his airplane such as a carrier-deck,
the practical consequences could be disastrous. The theories of space perception,
Abstract Space and the World of the Flier
,the lines and figures of the stereoscope,
interest in the rapidly developing field of
from the laboratories and all the theories
of ingenious men had little practical ap-
It does not consist of objects at varying
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
one basic object, a continuous surface of
pilot who cannot see the ground or sea is
vt to lose touch with reality in his flying.
A'bisual field of blue sky, or fog, or total
which is the nearest thing to no space at
all. Only a substitute for the ground and
its horizon in the form of instruments will
permit him to maintain the level flight of the
airplane under such conditions and to pro-
spatial situation which needs to be analysed, therefore, must involve the ground
and everything that it implies. Instead of
stract world of events defined by Newton.
It was and still is of enormous value for
the fact that it simplifies such problems
Space, time, points, and instants are useful terms, but not the terms with which to
pilot flies; it is the prototype of the world
in which we all live. In it, one can stand
and move about. It conditions and provides support for motor activity. A ground
and indirectly for all behavior which depends on these adjustments.
each retinal image) is invariably filled by
portion of the visual field is usually filled
with a projection of the sky. Between the
high or low as the observer looks down or
field in a horizontal section. This is the
ancestors lived. It was also the environ'The theories of space-perception which
flourished in the 19th century were all theories
of abstract, empty space. The experiments
concerned lines and points in an indeterminate
visual field, as seen in a stereoscope or a
and the experiments alike may be characterized
as geometrical. They were great intellectual
achievements (the theories of the "horopter"
are an example), but they will not be con sidered at present. The theory of disparate retinal
images as it applies to surfaces rather than
abstract points will be restated in the next
chapter, and the conception of geometrical
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
ment in which took place the evolution of
visual perception in their ancestors. Dur-
constant visual stimuli to which the eyes
and sky, but the floor is still an equivalent to the ground. This basic surface
is the background for the objects to which
learned in Chapter 3, its horizontal axis
is implicit in every visual field whatever
over the ages it must have determined the
fundamental pattern of retinal images for
The classical theories of space perception conceived the third dimension to
be a line extending outward from the eye.
eye and the object fixated. The perceived distance of this object seemed to
be what heeded explanation, and the explanation was sought in the consequences
have been better to seek an explanation of
the sensory continuum of distance as such
2So universally is the ground taken to be
the background of objects that the mere location of one patch of color above another in the
visual field tends to make it appear more distant. Height in the visual field can be a
genuine clue to distance only if upright pos-
ture, a level ground, and a tendency for objects to be on the ground are assumed. This
as the continuum of distance was conceived as the third dimension. The solution of the difficulty is to recognize that
from the observer in the third dimension.
Figure 20 illustrates the two formulations of the problem. The points A,R,C,
and D are not discriminable on the retina.
Distance along this line may be a fact of
geometry but it is not one of vision. The
distances are discriminable on the retina.
noted that the retinal spots become prohighlights on the surface.
gressively closer together as the distance
now ask, is implied by this latter formulation of the problem? How is a surface
The first place to look for an explanation
the important features of the visual world
a psychophysical theory will be possible.
Chapter 4, is a good correlate (but not a
perception, despite an entrenched opinion
to the contrary. The retinal image, it is
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 20. Two Formulations of the Problem of Distance Perception
compares it with the elaborate reality of
the visual world, but the fact is that it
is not something to be looked at; it is a
it resembles the visual world but whether
for all the features of the visual world.
its stimulus variations, we shall open up
the possibility of experimental control of
the -variations are or are not in psychophysical correspondence with the observer's perceptions. This is the method
called, of men and animals have been determined.
variation of the physical stimulus? Although this experiment has seldom been
appliecP4to what are traditionally called
It is, of course, a departure from tradition to conceive that a surface, or an outline, or the depth of a surface should have
simply light energy. But such a definition
hundred years of research on color vision
and light-dark discrimination, the outcome
higher animals do not simply react to the
connection, that the Gestalt theory denied
any one-to-one correspondence between the
stimulation of receptors and the experience
fixed correspondence was called the "constancy hypothesis."
It seemed to be untenable since everyday visual experience was
so demonstrably unlike its retinal image. The
aim of this chapter is to reassert the constancy
hypothesis on the basis of a broader conception of stimulation.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
retina, on which their environment is projected by means of focused light. As a
result they can react indirectly to the environment itself, and the point would be
missed by insisting that they are actually
tinction of Heider (51) and KofIka (67) be-
Before attempting to answer this question it would be useful to agree on just
ranges of variation (the limits being called
absolute thresholds) which excites a receptor or a set of receptors differentially.
If it does not release physiological activity in a receptor-mechanism it is not a
stimulus. As the energy varies successively, the excitation varies concomitantly
definition of a stimulus. For our present
receptors, or a differential excitation of
different receptors, and the order of such a
"Ordinal" simply refers to order or succession. This is what has usually, but
inaccurately, been called pattern stimulation.
tween the "distant" stimulus (the object)
object does, and the question is how both
physical event may be treated as an infinite series of geometrical points or as a
finite number of minute areas of arbitrary
size. The latter is the more useful assumption for our purpose. In either case
ways: first in the character or "color" of
second in the distribution of these spots,
easy to deal with the complexities of disanother.
start, that organisms can react specifically
to the order of the light-spots as well as
to the character of the light in each spot.
it can react differently to a spot-sequence
it does to the sequence "white-grayblack," then the order is the effective fact
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
stimulation, but they are not to be considered the elements of visual experience, or the sensory units of perception.
the operations of a surveyor add up to the
surface of the earth which he surveys. It
should be emphasized that the fundamental
(112, p. 85). Each hypothetical light ray
was supposed to be an individual stimulus.
the homogeneous total field experiment de-
same wave length and intensity there is no
that the organism cannot respond to raydirections as such. What the retina does
respond to is a differential intensity in
adjacent order over the retina. The necessary condition for pattern vision is an inhomogeneity of the set of hypothetical
rays, not the rays themselves. The raydirection theory of the stimulus, the pointtheory of objective space, and the local-
variations in light energy and in order or
sign theory of subjective space all collapse
spond to a specific set of ray-directions
of order into which the elements might fall.
4As will appear in a later chapter, there is
evidence that organisms can react specifically
to a successive order of stimulation of the
same spot as well as to an adjacent order of
stimulation of different spots. Both kinds of
order are present in retinal stimulation. The
successive order "black-gray-white" yields
a lightening effect and the reverse a darkening
effect; the adjacent order yields a patterning
effect. A co-variance of successive and adjacent order seems to be the essential condition for visual motion. For the present we are
The term order is often used by philosophers
and artists in a very inclusive sense. It may
together if this implication is correct and
Considering the retinal image as an array of small adjacent areas of, different radiant energy, let us try to state the kinds
For the sake of simplicity we may consider a hypothetical case in which there
are only two levels of light intensity in
the image and no differences of waveAn element may be relatively
letter 1 and if the latter by d. The simplest of all orders would then be 11111111 or
The term is here used, however, in an exact
and literal sense to refer to that character-
which is not the same in one direction as in
fields like the sky, absolute darkness, or
direction, and even magnitude or distance.
istic which numbers have of making a sequence
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
of pure areal color, seen at an indeterminate distance.
array of elements and, when it does, what
we call lines or discontinuous areas will
this type of order is a stimulus correlate
for the margins or outlines which are the
must be remembered that we are describing what first happens on the retina, not
currence of a margin or outline in perception is
determined primarily by the step from light to
latter may be guessed at from such phenomena
as brightness contrast at a border and the inhibition of one border in perception by an
adjacent border or a succeeding one, all of
The significant experiments on this problem are described by
Bartley (6) in his chapter on visual contour.
The stages intermediate between a true contour
studied by MacLeod (78) together with the accompanying effects (contrast or constancy) on
the areas separated by the contour or penumbra. Here also there is presumably some kind
visual quality of texture, and that this is
the stimulus correlate of a visual surface.
The varieties of texture in experience are
innumerable, of course, but the varieties
texture of a visual surface is the phenomenal correlate of some repetitive type of
retinal stimulation. If physical surfaces
have regular structures peculiar to them,
as wood, cloth, or earth have, the regularity will be projected in a focused
the stimulation, in turn, may well be the
The three kinds of order just defined are
tent, for outlines, and for surfaces in the
surfaces as they are seen in three dimen6A
been suggested by Dr. Leonard Carmichael.
Many of the great classical painters, especially those Dutch painters who worked
with magnifying glasses and the finest of
brushes, could simulate velvet, satin, the
texture of flower-petals, and even the peculiar
sheen of a drop of water on the flower by the
precise arrangement of spots of pigment. The
microstructure of the paint was quite different from the microstructure of the real fabric,
the real petal, or the real water-drop. What the
painter could reproduce was the microstructure
of the light reflected from these surfaces.
Qualities of lustre, softness, hardness, wet-
ness, and the like are very clear in these
paintings. The analysis of visual texture will
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
best exemplified by the terrain. For that
progressive order of elements in the retinal
image, or gradients as forms of stimulation.
Retinal Gradients as Variables of Stimulation
Consider for a moment the physical environment from which light is reflected and
see surfaces parallel to the line of sight
(Figure 20). These will be called longitudinal surfaces to distinguish them from
frontal surfaces, which are perpendicular
to the line of sight. The former are best
exemplified by the ground; the latter are
of the physical environment and its parts
are either longitudinal, frontal, or somewhere between these two extremes.
a longitudinal surface, and the surface BC
is a frontal surface. In the retinal image
from coars: to fine, whereas in the retinal
cross-sectional view from the side (A B is
a floor or the ground), or from above (AB
FIGURE 21. The Optical Projection of a Longitudinal and a Frontal Surface
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
environment with respect to slant. Moreover, as everybody knows, a photograph
image. It would be a serial change in the
length of the cycles of a repetitive order.
An example might be ddddlllldddlllddlldl.
learned to neglect that impression and to
If a repetitive order is the stimulus for
the texture of different surfaces may vary
of sandpaper used by carpenters differ in
longitudinal surface must be a continuous
same texture in various grades of density.
When the image of a single surface varies
progressively in this way, it may be that
stimulus for the impression of continuous
correspond a variation in the image at the
program of experiments would be necessary, and a beginning on such a program
differs progressively from point to point,
the perceived surface can differ correspondingly in its distance or depth. There
11.0.0%.11.0.0.0.0e0.0%.896.0.0%.0.0.0.12 01048.0
.......... ......................................e.
............................................... ., %60104%.
.....................................................
.41sese.o.I.0.1114Vesssees*eseees.e.41%.*.e....e:e.0
4.4.0.11...0.11..0.8.0. ellessessesssisese
:"6.0.4,:u:s.d.V18:6, or.oe:s:m.e...11.41.e.o.e.s.e..
.. ... ................................oh
:.0.0.0:0:0:0:0.5665.11.505.00.0:11::::*".:
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 23. Gradients of Natural Texture and
the Resulting Impression of Continuous Distance
FIGURE 24. Texture-Perspective and the Impression of Receding Surfaces
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
will be described in subsequent chapters.
with respect to the impression of depth and
which a gradient from coarse to fine runs
from the bottom to the top of the picture.
mean size, the gradients in both pictures
are similar. In both pictures there appears a continuous increase in the,visible
of a ground extending away from the observer is fairly compelling. In Figure 24,
many different gradients of texture-density
only noticeable variation to be discovered
in them, they are interpreted by most observers from cues present in the picture
are a ploughed field and a field of growing
alfalfa, which are correct. It is possible to suppose that the interpretation is the cause of the depth-impression.
Figure 25, however, was constructed artificially out of line-segments, with a
toward the top of the picture. The impression of a surface extended in distance is clear in this picture as well as
the gradation of texture elements, not the
familiarity of elements, is the principal
picture may also be interpreted as a level
terrain extending off to the horizon, but
there are no actual cues for such a meaning, and we may conclude that the impression of distance is an immediate process, while the interpretation follows
imply an innate intuition of distance; it
only implies that the impression of distance may have a definable stimulus just
other in straight lines converging to the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
horizon, but were instead offset. Aligning
them would have induced the familiar apThe
gradient of texture is not the same thing as
ordinary perspective, although the two are
united by underlying principles as will be
as their size approaches zero or "vanishes" at the horizon. In this respect the
texture of a longitudinal surface and the
perspective of objects are alike. But the
of which the latter is only a special case.
The artificial texture of Figure 25 might
at the bottom of the picture twice as long
but not the vertical ones, could have been
impression of distance on a surface, how-
elements on the retina will vary depending
whether the observer is flying an airplane, perched on a telephone pole,
standing, or sitting on the ground. Whatever their size may be, however, they
diminish to zero in a gradient up the visual
of texture in the visual field corresponds
principle should apply not only to distance-perception on the ground, in aerial
and out-of-doors space, but also to distance-perception in the civilized spaces
order to apply the principle,. we need to
distinguished: longitudinal, frontal, and
slanting, with respect to the line of sight.
Gradients of texture on man-made surfaces
a faster rate of decrease of the line segments from the bottom to the top of the
picture, or a larger angle of convergence
of the theoretical lines connecting their
ends (linear perspective). So long as the
the top of such a picture, the impression
In perceiving distance on a real terrain,
the rate of the gradient is a function of
not at all, and these are the three respective conditions for a longitudinal, a slanting, or a frontal surface. The texture of a
an unchanging texture gives the impression
gradient of texture, it may decrease upwards, from left to right, right to left, or
downwards, and these are the four respec-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 26. A Gradient of Density in Four Different Directions, as Compared with an Even Density
The Cues for Distance as Stimulation Graents.
These rules are illustrated in Figure 26,
where an artificial gradient has been constructed in each of these four directions.
It can be compared with the similar figure
where the surface, insofar as a surface is
represented, appears to lie in the plane of
as a floor or wall, has a unique gradient
curved surface or one with edges, such as
an object possesses, should have a unique
The historical origins of the traditional
cues for distance have already been discussed in Chapter 2. The accepted list of
3. The relative apparent motion of objects as the observer moves his head.
therefore seems possible that a change of
near one, or the superposition of one contour on another produced when one object
gradient may be a stimulus for the impression of depth and relief in an object.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
jects, to which is sometimes appended the
loss of sharp outline and detail. This is
problem of distance and suggested a theory
For when they are considered as variables
of perception rather than as facts of knowl-
tion of the object in the visual field, the
7. The relative brightness of the obThis has been conceived by some
writers to be an inverse indicator of its
based on a misconception. It is sometimes
the lower will be the intensity of its retinal image, but this principle applies only
to point-sources, not to reflecting surfaces.
This is an indicator or sign, not of distance but of the depth or relief of a single
images of the object as a cue to its depth,
and the relative disparities (crossed and
uncrossed) of different objects as cues to
eyes on a fixated object, the convergence
the lens for a fixated object necessary to
may all prove to be gradients of stimulation, or related to such gradients.
be a special result of the decrease in size
of figures in the visual field from the lower
might be a special result of the gradients
of deformation which fill the visual field
of one shape on another is best understood by analyzing the outline between
them, and this outline may prove to involve a step separating two continuous
gradients. Aerial perspective is, for the
most part, a simple gradient of hue in the
retinal disparity, like the other signs of
is true, but a gradient of the theoretically
visual field obtained with both eyes open,
as we shall see, always contains a gradiLinear perspective is also a geometrical
technique for drawing the edges of straightsided objects, but the two meanings should not
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
comes intelligible in the light of a "groundtheory" instead of an "air-theory" of
the slope of a road should end at a cliff
it is properly thought of not as a gradient
but as a step or discontinuity. These concepts appear to be admirably adapted for
gradients and steps of stimulation can be
or zero (the last being a level gradient),
proposal that the light-sensitive cells of
gradient. The gradient may itself change,
in the brain connected with them can react
gradients. Along the axes of an organism,
be convincing they will have to be defrom head to tail, from front to back, or
from the apex to the base of a limb, there
monstrated, and the attempt to do so will
exist gradients of metabolism, excitability,
9/land growth. Now these gradients of actiThe Concept of Gradient
vity are not merely spontaneous selfThe word gradient means nthing more '41' generated phenomena but are also reactions
complex than an incteasesrder.r.oe-st.--Di
of the living cells to their environment.
something along a given axis or dimension.
Although conditioned in part by the genes
curves of analytical geometry. The graprimarily determined by differentials of
dient of a railroad or highway, for example,
temperature, light, chemical concentration,
or electrical activity that is to say, by
as the slope of a road does in hilly counif
used the term gradient to refer to a change in
border within the retinal image. He is thinking
of a microscopic shadow-edge as it falls on
the mosaic of retinal cells which can be considered a gradient since the change must be
distributed over the width of a number of cells.
guished from a macrogradient. Visual contours, visual acuity, and the elements of
visual texture all seem to involve micro-
to gradients of stimulation, therefore, is
gradients of luminous intensity. The cues for
the depth or slant of a surface, on the other
hand, seem to involve macrogradients over a
gradient of the density of texture would be one
case. A gradient of shading in the hollows of
a surface or the shading toward the unlighted
side of a curved object would be another.
The penumbra of a shadow is such a gradient
according to MacLeod (78), and he has demonstrated with "artificial penumbrae" the different
effects of a steep gradient as compared with a
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
effects of a steep gradient as compared with
strated with "artificial penumbrae" the different
might be termed a microgradient as distin-
according to MacLeod (78), and he has demon-
the mosaic of retinal cells which can be con-
border within the retinal image. He is thinking
The penumbra of a shadow is such a gradient
gradient of the density of texture would be one
hand, seem to involve macrogradients over a
gradients of luminous intensity. The cues for
as the slope of a road does in hilly coun-
gradient. The gradient may itself change,
to gradients of stimulation, therefore, is
proposal that the light-sensitive cells of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
of a gradient theory to a sensory surface
forces, in analogy with a gravitational or
electrical field, has found application not
of visual perception and of goal-directed
behavior (68, 74). Child argues, however,
psychologist's problem of the physiological
have found the concept of gradients useful
such is vague, and that a field theory is
yet been attempted, however, and the ways
can only be carried out in terms of the definable and measurable gradients which
with Child in this criticism. Field theory
combine geometrically within the organism
to yield what could be termed a physiological "field." The concept of a field of
Assuming that a field is deterits gradients, an analysis of
" --COLD AND COOL ---1.- -4-- WARM --0- -4- HOT -a-4 PAINFUL
A CONTINUOUS INCREASE IN "HEAVINESS" OR "PRESSURE" WITHOUT QUALITATIVE CHANGES OR NAMED POINTS OF REFERENCE
FIGURE 27. Examples of Psychophysical Correspondence
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the stimulation gradients involved in perceptual (and possibly in behavioral)
than further attempts to discover the laws
The Concept of Psychophysical Correspondence.
perception to the variables of stimulation
is exemplified in Figure 27. Four pairs of
line of each pair represents a variable of
stimulation, and points on the lower line
represent descriptions or judgments of the
indicated by dotted lines. It is noteworthy that, for some variables like temperature and others like weight, the
their physical variables may be shifted by
adaptation. For example, after holding the
formerly felt warm now feels neutral and a
displaced, but it is still a specific and
regular correspondence (38). It is reason-
able to suppose that the spatial qualities
qualities illustrated above, may undergo a
shift in their correspondence to stimula-
tion without a destruction of the corres-
pondence. Something of this sort probably
of physics and the variable of experience
in each case are in a one-to-one correspondence.
introduction to the problem of scaling the
paradox (exemplified by auditory "volume")
dimensions of the physical stimulus (11). The
difficulty is resolved if one defines the dimen-
now been outlined. Its strength or weakness can be estimated better if its postulates are made clear. It may be useful,
condition for seeing a visual world is an
sions of the stimulus as those variables of
stimulation, however mathematically complex,
with which the variations in discriminative
response prove to be correlated as the outcome
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
array of physical surfaces reflecting light
longitudinal surface is one parallel with
or the so-called third dimension, is reducible to the problem of the perception
of longitudinal surfaces. When no surface is present in perception because of
homogeneous retinal stimulation, distance
constitute three other geometrical types.
4. The general condition for the perception of a surface is the type of ordinal
5. The general condition for the perception of an edge, and hence for the perception of a bounded surface in the visual
field, is the type of ordinal stimulation
is reducible to the problem of the changing
slant of a curved surface or the differing
7. The general condition for the perception of a longitudinal or slanted surface is a kind of ordinal stimulation called
been described, and it has been suggested
gradient of retinal disparity, a gradient of
have the function of stimulus-correlates for
to the total retinal image is an anatomical
ence of the visual world to the total retinal
is more difficult to analyse and specify.
literal and exact, we may believe, than the
former, and it is clear that the way to determine it is to find the obscure variations
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Stimulus Gradients of the Density of Texture
of ObjectsGradients of Texture and Grades of
typical physical world of ground and objects and assert that, first, objects tend
to be in contact with the ground instead of
up in the air and that, second, they tend to
be distributed over the ground with an even
scatter. The first assertion will probably
second, it can be proved that the physical
physical world is projected on the retina
scene consists of the ground and of objects (and remembering also that the image
is inverted). Near objects will be imaged
large and high up on the retina. Far objects will be imaged smaller and lower
small that their size approaches a vanishing point. At the line where the earth
tends to be regular. The principle holds for
grass in a meadow, for trees in a forest,
for the boards in a floor, and the patterns
images of objects become indiscriminable.
This is the fundamental world for vision.
of a carpet. Above all, it holds excellently
The rule is that those parts of the world
projected small. In the visual field, the
single element of the texture of a surface. The grain or structure of a surface is made up of units of one kind or
far apart at the lower boundary of the field
These units are characteristic of the physical substance in ques-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
reflections from the surface which can be
square inch (or yard or mile) tends to be
the same as the number in any other square
unit of measure, and this is what is meant
either particles on a surface or things on
except in the case of mechanically processed surfaces or man-made layouts of
retinal image and the resulting perception
can be fitted to a set of special rules, but
this fact must not distract us from considering the importance of natural distributions. 1
so-called perception of space is the projection of its objects and elements as an
objects and elements recede from the observer. Whenever the observer moves hi:3
head there will also occur a gradual change
'The structure of substances at microscopic
and sub-microscopic levels of size is studied
The structure of the universe on the scale of
miles and light-years is studied by astronomy.
But the structure of the world on the scale of
the textures of surfaces and the distributions of objects is so
familiar that it has been very little studied.
The eye and the retina ate adapted to register
the structure of the world only at this range of
sizes. Finer and grosser structure can be
tt seen?! only by the use of special devices
of motility in the image as the corresponding objects and elements recede. If
both eyes are functioning there will be a
elements of one image relative to the other
retinal image corresponding to the physical recession of the environment, but
The gradient of size and density, therefore, is a necessary correlate of recession.
next will be to consider, one by one, these
various so-called cues for distance perception when they are reformulated as
motionless observer with his eyes fixed straight ahead.
In the following chapter we shall go on to
observer, and only then attempt to understand the image of an observer who scans
ly registers in succession different sectors
have already been given in Figures 23 and
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
image could be verified only by getting at
Is needed. Its implied relation to linear
perspective should also be explored, together with its relation to line or contour.
But first we need to consider how a gradi-
gradient is not necessary, and the measurement of its corresponding plane projece
error. As Figure 28 illustrates, they are
in a perfect point-to-point correspondence
ent of texture on the retina can be artificially produced and hence experimentally
Retinal Projection. The obvious method of
be to draw it on paper and present it to the
observer's eye in the position of the picture-plane, so that it will produce a retinal
gradient of texture. This is the method employed
with one another, and the one arrangement
the other at any time if the dimensions of
specify the retinal distribution of light
retina itself. Moreover, the plane projection is more readily compared with the
easier to conceptualize. We will therefore
legitimate method? The retinal image of a
given object is not a plane projection of
that object, such as a drawing or a photograph would be, inasmuch as the retina is
moreover, is inverted relative to the plane
projection; it is not actually a picture.
A Picture-Gradient, its Retinal Gradient,
and the Longitudinal Surface Corresponding to Both
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
a texture gradient on the picture plane is
photography, photoengraving, and of controlled
The Elements and Gaps of Visual Texture. There are, as theatrical magicians
invisible. The test for whether a physical
texture is whether the surface can or cannot be brought into focus by a lens, that
is, whether an image of the surface can be
produced. It makes no difference, theoretically, whether one uses an eye or a camera
for this test. Perfectly flat transparent
Neither can any surface when its illumination is sufficiently low. It is no more
sheet of plate glass or a large mirror (if
highlights are absent and the edges of the
surface are not in the field) than it is to
get an optical image of the cloudless sky
or the interior of a completely blacked-out
room. Surfaces of this type are fortunately
not the surfaces on which we walk and sit
and which characterize the objects of our
geneous, like plate-glass. If the surface
piece of cloth, a ploughed field, or a hilly
terrain seen from the air are all alike in
this respect except for the difference in
the reflectivities of the different particles are
chemical or both, they will reflect light
differentially and the image of the surface
will consist in an array of cyclical changes
sets of abstractions, reflecting-points and
the latter, point for point. The structural
and chemical cycles of the surface, therefore, are projected on the retina as cycles
the stimulus for visual texture. Both the
cycles and the resulting texture can be of
many different types, such as the rippled
of a plaster surface, or the regular units of
of texture to be tried out in experiments
analysed by plotting it in two dimensions,
that is, by specifying the alternations or
repetitions of light stimulation along two axes.
This is what is meant by cycles. Admittedly
this assumption needs mathematical study. A
texture cannot be analysed conveniently in
terms of lines, nets, grids, or other patterns
these are themselves special cases of texture.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the same time unfamiliar or abstract. The
a projection are illustrated in Figure 30,
more accurately as consisting of elements
gaps white, the texture can be artificially
cyclical character of texture can be preserved by making the size of the elements
a constant ratio of the size of the gaps.
gaps in any desired gradient on the picture-plane with respect to their size. We
projection of a longitudinal surface on a
walk, extending from the eye of the observer
squares as unit areas of surface. The projection is a series of adjacent trapezoids
diminishing gradually to a point, so that
the whole constitutes a triangle. Considering the width of each projected square one
notes that it decreases upward on the picto
What is popularly known as "linear perspective" is comprised by this fact.
Considering the height of each trapezoid,
however, one notes that it decreases upward on the picture with a gradient which
FIGURE 30. The Principles of Perspective for Square Units of the Ground
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
is not linear but negatively accelerated.
The projected height of flat areas, some-
of diagonals or a variant of it (116), which
requires the use of more than one vanish-
times called foreshortening, can be drawn
ing point and is therefore not illustrated
that of lines to a single vanishing point,
a technique less familiar but equally important in the practice of perspective.
These two techniques enable the experimenter to construct on paper a gradient
which will bear a specific relationship to
a material surface in the third dimension.
object on the ground with increasing distance from the observer is subject to two
rules, one applying to the frontal dimension of the unit object and the other to its
longitudinal dimension. The first rule is
instead of to the edges of a surface, as is
represented only the outlines of the surThe Perspective of
simply'the Law of the Visual Angle, which
jected as a size (S) which is the reciprocal of the distance (D).
project so as to give a perfectly linear decrease up the plane of the projection, and
the ends may therefore be joined by straight
lines to a vanishing point, as illustrated.
The second rule states that a longitudinal
dimension of the unit object is projected
accelerated function of the distance (D).
Algebraically it comes out that A is pro-
foreshortened in the projection, that is,
be constructed geometrically by the method
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 32. Spot-Distributions which Yield Impressions of a Longitudinal and a Frontal Surface
Perfectly Regular Spacing of the Elements
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
STIMULUS VARIABLES - MOMENTARY STIMULATION
different arrays of spots and gaps. In the
left-hand array, the width of the gaps is
and the height of the gaps by a negatively
array there is no decrease; the gradient is
zero. The dimensions of the spots are determined by the same rules as for the
gaps but, in the drawing, these dimensions
spacing of the spots on the corresponding
Such alignments would produce the familiar
In order to demonstrate that this special
type of perspective is not necessary in a
texture gradient, a slight irregularity of
destroy vertical and diagonal alignments.
This was achieved in the drawing by offsetting each successive row of spots to
the right or left in a random fashion. The
space is, moreover, one on which the observer looks down from above. It is what
pictures are inverted, the sensory impression of distance remains but it is a dis-
other instances later in which the reversal of a gradient yields the impression
distribution on the left should produce a
longitudinal surface and that on the right
a frontal surface. With respect to being a
surface this prediction is not wholly confirmed, since for many observers the
pretations such as "lily-pads on the surface of a pond" or "the heads of people
in a crowd" or "disembodied cabbagepatch" are frequent. To common sense,
an array of objects seems to have nothing
for the first could hardly also be a stimulus for the second. Nevertheless a transition must be possible between an array of
objects and an array of texture elements.
observer at a distance or the flier at an
altitude. The significant fact is that the
elements of the sort found on a physically
of elements which do not lie on the surface but project upward from it. A stubble
was constructed in the effort to produce a
synthetic gradient of texture of this sort.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
will be able to think of a hundred interrelations and subtleties not even hinted
the hypothesis that a gradient of texture
is, in isolation, a stimulus for the impression of continuous distance on a surface.
unlike them, they ate vertical on the picture-plane. The height of the elements
only non-linear gradient in. the drawing is
in the height of the gaps, or the mean verti-
lines. In this drawing, as in the last, all
in the last chapter, scarcely make a beginning at exploring the complex relations between visual texture and space.
The impression of distance on the lefthand section of Figure 36 is not surprising since it is common in pictures and
have the effects of producing a surface in
perception just as texture produces a surface. It may be noted in passing that
both the inlines and the outlines of a longitudinal surface are projected on a pictureplane by the rules of geometry illustrated
consideration of outlines until we come to
Surfaces composed wholly of such inlines are represented in these three drawings. When their density increases toward the top of the picture, the impression
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 35. Two Pictures with Varieties of Texture within the Same Scene
,1,;.,,,,L'g.:;:c4,"'Vtt,co,,;45io,,,,i,,,,",:;,,',s;:,,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 36. The Effect of a Width-Gradient, or Linear Perspective
the gradient is zero the impression is that
that of a floor made of boards, or (since
yields an impression of increasing distance at the top, but the drawing does
the first has. The first drawing is deter-
from the perspective of a floor. The second
field makes no difference for the impression
of distance; it is the gradient of density
ing, for instance, although the lines run
plane, such as to give the perspective of a
creases up the picture, and the surface we
see is the same as in the left-hand draw-
the observer and then away from him. Some
observers can see just such a curved sur-
boards, the space between lines decreases
on the scale of the picture in the specific
complex surface in this case should not be
considered puzzling. All gradients become mathematically very complex when
to be noted is that a curved physical surface may have just as specific a correlate
That "o the left yields the impression of a
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 37. Gradients of Vertical Spacing Corresponding to Three Types of Surface
classical rules of linear perspective. All
point on the horizon or are horizontal and
parallel. Figure 38 is an example of such
plane with none other than straight lines.
It is an ideal exercise for the use of the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
by three sets of lines to three vanishing
points, plus one set of horizontal lines.
like this differs of course from the physical texture of most natural surfaces. Instead of what we have called elements
the object were known because the object was familiar could a decision be
and gaps it is composed of flat geometrical
forms which fit into one another. It never-
gradient of inlines is a stimulus for continuous distance on a surface as well as
to be sensed in isolation and then interpreted. A given retinal image as such
could give no evidence of the distance of
its object, for the object might be either
large and far off. Such a confusion would
yards distant rather than 50 yards because it is seen as a 6 foot man and not
however, the perception might be erroneous.
size of an object is only a cue to its distance in the sense that it provides a fact
as a Cue to their Distance. The classical
theory that distance is perceived by a mind
seated in the brain and making use of the
cues presented to it by a retinal picture is
very different from the theory we are now
array of texture elements or objects on a
physical distance, are stimulus correlates
gradient theory accounts for the distance
of all objects in the array, rather than the
single object on which attention is fixed.
Instead of asking "How do we see continuous distance from here in all directions?" the classical theory asks "How
inferring of the distance of a familiar ob-
ject on the basis of its perspective size
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
exactly as large as a plane with a wingspan of 50 feet at 5,000 feet. If the
observer could tell one from the other by
vision. But if the shapes differ, and one
bomber while the other is a smaller attack
perceived to be low. This type of distance estimation improves with training,
and thousands of observers have had experience in it during the last war. The
point to be noted is that it is not the kind
only one possible in certain circumstances. Airplane spotters, for instance,
can be trained to estimate the altitude of
although their error is at best considerable. An airplane seen against the clear
sky is not set into a background of continuous distance; it appears in the closest
an altitude of 10,000 feet will be imaged
The problem of the perception of distance is not really separate from the problem of the perception of depth or solidity.
irrelevant to either problem, the impression
of a surface is the basic factor underlying
both the experience of space and the experience of objects. Space is the visual
background of objects and, when it is determinate, space reduces to the surface or
Objects are also defined by their surfaces.
have not yet considered. It is necessarily
is the depth-shape of the object) and it is
always delimited by a contour (the projected shape of the object). What are the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
long way toward accounting for their depthshape.
of Objects. The first problem is to account for the perception of what has been
variously called relief or modelling of objects in the third dimension. The traditional explanation has been the stereoscopic effect of binocular vision, supplemented by the mental interpretation of
intersection of two planes with differing
slants. An abrupt variation in slant corresponds to an abrupt change in the
width gradient for simplicity in drawing.
The change is from one rate of convergence
server. If the change had been to a faster
the texture of the object varies in density
have been one convex toward the observer.
The locus of the discontinuity also gives
the impression of a visual line even though
no line is drawn. It may be thought of as
eclipses another, is often accompanied by
the impression of a jump in depth whereas
the inline of a joint or corner is not. The
which accompanies and ordinarily accounts
for a contour according to the suggestion
formula for bounded surfaces in the third
the line of sight. It is that the gradient
surface bears a fixed relation to the slant
and facing of the physical surface projected. If this principle holds for a surface it holds for portions of that surface,
and if the slant of a surface varies continuously or suddenly from point to point
possible stimulus basis for the perception of a curved or bent surface.
An illustration has already been given of
a gradient in the density of texture which
yield a bend or corner of a surface? If we
in the last chapter, does not account for
abrupt variation in texture, however, can
account for it at least as a contributing
;There are evidently different ways in which
a line may be evoked in vision. One should
not be too preoccupied with the lines produced
by pens and pencils. Besides the outline or
contour of an object on its background there
are the inlines produced by joints within a
surface (Figure 38) and also, as we have just
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
are the inlines produced by joints within
contour of an object on its background there
not be too preoccupied with the lines produced
tinuously or suddenly from point to point
and if the slant of a surface varies con-
face it holds for portions of that surface,
in the last chapter, does not account for
surface bears a fixed relation to the slant
for a contour according to the suggestion
which accompanies and ordinarily accounts
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Change of Gradient Corresponding to a Corner
the gradient of density, however, there is
a change in the amount of density with the
gradient remaining constant on either side
gives the impression of a visual line even
though no line is drawn. It differs from the
lower surface now appears in front of the
upper surface with a jump in depth between
It seems likely that here is a contributing
stimulus for the experience of a contour or
parently produce a visual line, but of different types. A corner and a contour, althOugh both are lines in the visual field,
the perception of depth in the visual world,
one helping make an object look solid and
the other making it stand out from the back-
ground. The perception of depth at a contour (particularly when it is enhanced by
binocular vision) probably has a great deal
to do with the impression that we can see
and changes in the density of texture are
specific stimulus correlates of the planes
and curves of an object, with their various
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Plotted Variations in the Stimulus-Gradients at
the Corner of an Object and at the Contour of an Object
Grades of Illumination and the Modelling of an Object or Surface. Painters
have known for centuries that an object is
shade over its surface. In present terminology, this means that the shading of
a visual object can give it a depth-shape.
the perspective of its edges, as Figure 43
shading, for it is easy to produce with a
tion. The principal factor determining the
lighted or shaded is whether it is directly
or only indirectly illuminated by the lightsource
the sun, let us suppose. A section of surface facing the sun is brighter
projected on a facing surface by an object
which intercepts the light, but these are
surface, then, is a function of the orientation of the surface toward or away from
the source of light. A fact to be especially
noted is that illumination is not a function
pencil or charcoal, but little or nothing
with a view to establishing the psychophysical correspondence, if there is any,
observer. The physical world gets visually
between depth-shape and grades of illumination.
either darker or brighter, and a distant area
of uniform terrain is not different from a
Considering the array-of surfaces which fill
the ordinary visual field with patches of
high illumination and some a low illumina-
denser as it recedes, but it does not get
4In the writer's opinion, some authorities
brightness and distance, probably because
they considered isolated points as the sources
of light instead of surfaces. The question will
be considered at the end of the next chapter.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 43. Gradients of Shading which Yield Depth
motility with which this chapter is principally concerned.
be that quality which, apart from its contour or silhouette, makes it object-like.
indentation. The three-dimensional shapes
of things, abstractly considered, are made
plies that an abrupt or a gradual variation
This kind of shape must have as a minimum either a pair of surfaces making a
rounded junction of surfaces. The junction
of adjoining surface areas. The elementary
the sun is in the south, then the southern
vexity or a concavity, both of which pos-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 44. Shading which Yields Edged and Curved Surfaces
There is nothing more in either of these drawings than shades of black, gray, and white.
Nevertheless we see in each a complex array of physical surfaces in three dimensions.
But note that the transitions between shades are of different kinds: some are abrupt or
"sharp ", others are gradual or "rounded". Accordingly, we see edged surfaces in some
places and curved surfaces in others. That the curved protuberances and identations of
the instrument-case are produced by gradual transitions between light and dark one may
verify by inverting the picture; transitions which formerly went "in" now come "out," or
tend to do so whenever the factor of superposition does not inhibit this reversal. The
relation of the drawing-instruments to their pockets is no longer precise but ambiguous.
This rendering is to be contrasted with the abstract drawing on the right where the transitions have intentionally been arranged so as to make the depth-relations equivocal and
nonrepresentative, and therefore to make the space of the picture fluctuate in an interesting manner. (Left: Rendering by Paul Madden. Right: From a painting entitled "Composi-
tion", by Van Doesburg. Courtesy of Mrs. Peggy Guggenheim.)
impression of a depth-shape. If the transi-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 45. Shapes Which Are Reversed when the Picture is Inverted
(a) Hills turn into valleys. (b) Quonset Huts turn into towers. (c) Craters turn into mounds.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 46. Reversal of Shape Due to Reversed Gradients of Density
are produced by light and shade alone, without any significant contribution by changes
in the gradient of texture-density, it might
which reverses the order of light and shade,
would turn each protuberance into an indentation and vice versa. This effect can
which suggests itself is that for any given
visual field the order of projected light
order "lighted-shadowed" yields a protuberance in perception, then the order
will be in the south, if he is in the northern hemisphere and if the hour is not too
shadowed-lighted in his visual field (from
left to right) will correspond to a protuberance and the order lighted-shadowed
and looks west, the order shadowed-lighted
will be an indentation and lighted-shadowed
shading is a stimulus for depth, therefore,
only in relation to the orientation of the
observer to his total visual world or, more
specifically, his orientation to the direction of the illumination. Is it conceivable
observer faces are reciprocally interrelated even in stimulation? The fact is
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
convexities of an object are not converted
into concavities. If, however, the observer
maintains his orientation and the light on
a surface in relief is experimentally reversed in direction without the observer's
knowledge the protuberances tend to become indentations just as they do in an
ents of texture are absent or ineffective.
stamp that made it, or to the wax impression and the seal that produced it, both of
modern instance of the phenomenon is encountered in the interpretation of aerial
photographs. Boring's Sensation and Perception in the History of Experimental
Psychology traces the investigation of the
visual object in depth may be analysed in
terms of several abstract variables which
slope of its surfaces to the observer's line
ments to the reader, it may also seem fair
variations yield impressions of depth, of
slope, and of surface-shape which correspond to some of these abstract features
surface away from the observer and the density of the texture varies with physical distance. Variation in shading, on the other
hand, is a function of the physical orienta-
tion of the surface to the light source. It
curving or bending of the surface relative
the slightest curve or bend, insufficient to
make much difference in a texture gradient,
can produce a variation in shading if the
direction of the light is favorable. Hence
arises the capacity of light and shade to
give what artists call relief to a surface,
contour separating it from the background.
correspond either variations in the density
explanation of the perception of material
objects. Although retinal correlates have
of texture of the retinal image, or varia-
of vision, the orientation of its surfaces
to the source of illumination, the corners
or curves of its surfaces (either convex or
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the Binocular Field, as Measured with a Perimeter
what is ordinarily called form. This is the
problem with which the Gestalt psychologists began. Paradoxical as it may seem,
more difficult to understand than the perception of shape in depth. We shall return
The Stimulus Gradient of Binocular Disparity Between Images
the visual field and the visual world which
only with both eyes open. The visual field
of both eyes is usually filled with double
binocular field (Figure 4 7 ) as distinguished
images are not easy to observe, since they
visual field which are not doubled will depend
the particular arrangement of. objects or
surfaces in the environment projected. The
theoretically should not be doubled is quite a
horopter, and a great deal of effort has been
EMpirical determinations of the horopter do not
agree well with theoretical constructions,
however, and it can be argued that the horopter
and the theory of corresponding points which
it expresses do not clarify the problem of why
we see objects in depth. In a surface theory
of space perception the horopter is irrelevant.
Carr suggests that the horopter is merely a
geometrical curiosity (19). The clearest ex-
planation of it in English is given by Troland
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tinuing to fixate the wall of the room, the
little practice in observing other things
in the field which one is not focusing on,
is known that the stimulus for this visible
disparity is an optical disparity of the two
of the environment from a different position.
Figure 48 illustrates this disparity of the
the left eye is drawn in dashed lines and
that of the right eye in solid lines. F in-
field is a product of binocular vision, as
dicates the point of fixation. The drawings
projected on a picture-plane, and the dis-
finger, closing and then reopening one eye.
field. If the monocular field appears some-
are parallel and without any convergence,
or to lack a special quality of depth, the
implication is that the double images are
it can be noted that the image of the left
`eye is relatively displaced to the right
(or that of the right eye to the left) except
not in the least doubled, but is thoroughly
arm's length and then move the left index finger toward your eyes, you can see
the disparity of the double finger increase.
You can also do the converse, fixating the
fact is that in the visual field as a whole,
objects, edges, or surfaces appear doubled
in proportion as they are physically nearer
or farther than the point of fixation. In
the central portion of the binocular field
the disparity of visible objects and elements is a direct function of their distance along the line of sight from the
the moment that the eyes are fixated on the
at the horizon, and that the amount of disparity is inversely proportional to distance
from the observer. This disparity is crossed, the image of the left eye being on the
represents something like the total field
field, strictly speaking, is only the central
portion of the total field, where the two
monocular fields overlap, and this has been
The disparity of the edges of the road increases as the distance of the road from
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Combined Images when Fixating the Horizon
Combined Images when Fixating a Near Point
FIGURE 48. Schematic Projections of the Retinal Images of
the Two Eyes and their Combination, showing Disparity
The images ar.: represented as projections on a picture-plane in front of each eye, not as
if seen from behind each eye. Hence they bear some resemblance to the visual field.
This expedient makes the disparity easy to visualize, but the relationship of inversion
is left out of account. It must be remembered that retinal images as such are never seen
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
bottom of the visual field is, of course, a
displacement relative to the other image,
for there is no other standard with respect
could not be drawn without conActually the two images are
usually composed of an array of texturemore
before, but now there is also an opposite
fixation up to the horizon. In the latter
gradient the image of the left eye is displaced to the left instead of to the right.
This kind of disparity has been called uncrossed to distinguish it from the crossed
vision, with the eyes moving rapidly from
one object of the environment to another,
fixation. In this situation, we may inquire,
form a single visual field even though they
front of the fixation point it is a right-left
disparity may vary in opposite directions.
Physical distance from the observer to the
with a scale of minus to plus disparity as
processes originating in each eye separately, and the visual world which results
are fixated on the horizon but are converging in some degree toward a spot or
considers the stimulus not as a geometrical picture but as an algebraic variable.
object on the ground, the combined images
the horizon is higher in the combined field
than before. At the level of the point of
fixation there is no disparity in the combined image and no double imaging in the
are thought of as cues for distance perception and retinal disparity is conceived
arises. How can the mind distinguish between a crossed pair of images and an un-
looks like the other so far as any experimenter has been able to observe? In the
disparity below the level of fixation, as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
face of this difficulty, the fact remains
changed by a change in fixation, such as is
yields the left hand wall of a corridor, or
the left side of an indentation. The pair
Figure 48. The difficulty is resolved if one
of pictures at the top have this gradient
of disparity, and yield a surface of this
sort when they are viewed in a stereoscope.
gradient. A rate of decreasing crossed disparity can be the equivalent of a rate of increasing uncrossed disparity in the same
equivalent in order and rate to the numbers
3,4,5,6. It is a reasonable hypothesis that
some graded process in the brain of the ob-
left, as does the right hand wall of a corridor or the left side of a protuberance.
The same pair of pictures, when interchanged right for left, have a reversed
server reacts to the disparity of his binocular images in just this fashion. The
rule would be that an impression of increasing depth on a surface is in psycho-
physical correspondence with any gradient
of disparity running in the direction toward
a floor or a ceiling does. If the uncrossed
picture-projection of each retinal image,
generalized to include the inclined surface which we have called a ceiling scene
wall scene looked at from the left as well
types of slanting surface, it will be recalled, are as fundamental to the perception of object-surfaces as they are to the
perception of surfaces of the environment.
vertically up or down the combined images
disparity of the two views increases upward, as it does in the bottom pair of
may be noted in a stereoscope that, since
the lines do not have a gradient of monocular perspective, the floor (or ceiling)
same types of surface may equally well be
obtained with a pair of views composed of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
A HORIZONTAL GRADIENT OF BINOCULAR DISPARITY
A VERTICAL GRADIENT OF BINOCULAR DISPARITY
Relation to the Fundamental Types of Slanting Surface
the effect of magnifying or stretching the
only or, in other words, of increasing the
wears these glasses ought to be predictable
from the above rules. The validity of the
the disparity produced have been reported
A horizontal gradient of disparity can be
and thereby increasing the apparent slant
of those surfaces. Allowing for the influence of conflicting gradients of texture
and perspective, the changes in the apparent slant of a physical surface which
one image relative to the other. The disparity is always horizontal whereas the
In general a vertical gradient of disparity can be described as a horizontal
gradient may be either vertical or horizonThese relative distortions of the
image are not to be confused with a rota-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
skewed or stretched has undergone a nonrigid transformation, mathematically speaking, whereas a rotation, like a simple
transposition of an image, is a rigid type
and for at least part of our impression that
we look out upon the world. It is important to account for these impressions since,
unexplained, they lend plausibility to the
perception of an abstract third dimension
projected outward from the eye in percep-
relative to the other, which is the original
meaning assigned to the term aniseikonia at
Objects. Figure 50 illustrates the way in
enlargement makes the two images disparate in quite a different way from the one
defined above: the disparity is not horizontal, it does not fall into a one-dimen-
sional gradient, and it would not occur in
natural vision. The effect of relative enlargement, indeed, appears to be equivocal
visual field, is actually a crossed doubleimage. It is, in fact, the ultimate limit
nose and the disparity of the next colorpatch above it in the visual field
continuous step in an otherwise continuous
stimulus for the impression of depth at a
for our impression that we see empty space
between ourselves and the nearest object,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
ject are disparate for the right and the left
binocular vision a depth-shape results, the
principle of the stereoscope, the invention of which provided Wheatstone with a
stereoscope is simply a device which permits the two views of Figure 50 to be projected independently on the two retinas.
corners of the solid object, as most drawings do, but not its textured surfaces.
to texture are not evident in 'the illustration. In the binocular vision of a real
of a natural scene are used, the gradients
of disparity on its various surfaces will
produce the kinds of slant we have already
described and will have the effect of giving
the object a shape in depth. The gradient
course, concurrent with a gradient of the
stimulus basis for the immediate experience
the parlor variety, is the depth which appears at the contours of objectsthe depth
background and which gives one the impression that there is empty space between
the object and whatever is behind it. The
ascribed to an abrupt change id the disparity of fusing elements, or a change in
the amount of disparity without any gradation. It is to be distinguished from the
from the abrupt (or gradual) change in the
gradient of disparity which is characteristic of a bend (or curve) in a surface.
believed for many years that the only im-
portant basis for depth perception in the
visual world is the stereoscopic effect of
binocular vision. This is a widely accepted opinion in the medical and physiological study of vision, opthalmology,. It
at an edge or a corner, moreover, is consistent with the change in the gradient of
texture and with the change in the grade of
assume that the only kind of test for depth
perception which a flier needs to pass is
even if the texture is indefinite, the object
irregular, the illumination flat, or the observer blind in one eye, there will be some
trinsic cues for depth, which is rooted in
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the belief is left without much foundation.
Depth, we have argued, is not built up out
of sensations but is simply one of the dimensions of visual experience. The accepted belief is contradicted by the fact
eye, or temporarily limited to the use of
efficiency. There have even been one-eyed
and that all of them are effective in everyday vision. The effect of any one may be
others, as we have tried to illustrate, but
sulting perception is something that can be
determined only by experiment, and something that will probably vary with the
conditions of stimulation. If the gradient
theory is correct, binocular vision simply
takes its place as a determinant, but only
fact that many animals who do not pos- .) Imoge
sess overlapping binocular fields and who
since their behavior is nicely gauged with
reference to it.6 The implication is that
stimuli for visual depth implies that the
gradient of disparity is only one of several,
evolved as a sort of alternative to panoramic
vision in which each eye has its own field of
view with little or no overlapping. The pri-
A disparity of the image in one eye relative to the other presupposes that both
images are textured. Only with respect to
a pattern of spots or lines could a disparity exist; there must be something to
something to do with texture since focusing
mates, apes and men, have forward pointing
eyes with coordinated eye movements, with
convergence of both eyes on the same object,
and with a total field of view approximating
point each to its own side, each moving in-
1800; but many other mammals, specially those
dependently, with little or no convergence and
with a total field of view approximating 360°.
evolution, the primates sacrificed the ability
to see all the way around at once for an enhancement of the ability to discriminate depth
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
world must be clear if it is to be useful.
the eye-muscles will agree. So also would
than to account for, depending as it does
cally, a scene is clear when it is sharp,
or detailed, or definite. It is not clear
theoretically interesting because there is
the two being interrelated, below or beyond
great many experiments have been performed on the conditions which affect it.
The artificial scenes which have been set
that can be recognized, starting with large
is the familiar eye-chart devised by Suellen, and modified by others.
a set of identical forms rotated to different positions which can be seen in correct
reported? This test eliminates the factor
into one. Two points cannot be used unless they are big enough to be each visible,
up to measure this kind of fine discrimination are interesting, and they may help to
All the above adjectives are properly applied to perception only. They do not adequately describe the external flux of light,
they certainly do not describe a process in
the nervous system, and they probably should
not even be applied to the retinal image when
this is conceived strictly as a stimulus, that
is, when the image is thought of as a complex
of variations rather than as a picture to be
8. Determine the just noticeable misalignment of the two segments of a broken
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
curvature or bend in a straight line (or a
10. Determine the just noticeable disparity between the image in the right eye
one of depth. This is called stereoscopic
tenth test, of binocular disparity, is complex. The eleventh, however, points to an
interesting conclusion, that a difference in
11. Determine the just noticeable difference between the gray of a solid shape
relatively abrupt gradient of intensity in
the retinal image. Is it possible that the
and the gray of its background, as evidenced by whether a contour (and hence
the shape itself) is perceptible. This is
microgradient of intensity is the fundamental stimulus underlying not only the phenomenon of a margin or contour but also the
usually called brightness-discrimination,
phenomena of texture, visual acuity in its
clear vision in general? Indirectly, if this
were true, it would be the basic stimulus
although there is evidence that it is related to the other modes of acuity (103,6).
fineness or density of visible texture is a
variations of dark and light. What do the
However a gap may be defined geometrically, it can be considered a fundamental
impressions of shape rather than elementary components of texture. They have to
do with the outline or margin of a physical
surface rather than with its texture. The
Vision? Sharp contours and definite textures in vision depend not only on accommodation of the lenses and normal
eyes (the dioptric mechanism) but also on
external or physical conditions and on internal or neurological conditions.
fifth tests employ a spot and a dark line
respectively. A line, of course, is a sort
of elongated spot. Spots may be components of a texture and streaks or in-
lines (as distinguished from outlines) may
eighth and ninth tests, however, are of a
occipital brain, the optic tract, the nerves,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
any data for depth-perception (121, p. 665-
parently does not fully develop in children until 7 or 8 years of age inasmuch as
visual acuity, poor in infancy, continues
to improve until then. Between the external light and the internal nervous process there stands the mechanism of the
eye itself. Here is where the most common
lens and the pointing of the eyes are reflex
adjustments. As reflexes they must have a
that this stimulus cannot simply be light;
it must be a condition of the retinal image
with respect to order or pattern. Fundamentally this condition is gegmetrical.
experienced a minimum degree of so-called
of the eyes to a stimulus when the stimulus
itself is something from which the explanation may be derived? Accommodation and
convergence are responses of the eyes to a
blur. A focused image depends on acBlur may result from a
whole complex of anatomical and physiological defects, the simplest results of
which are nearsightedness, farsightedness,
and astigmatism. These particular effects
can be compensated in part by supplement-
ing the lenses of the eyes with artificial
Cues for Distance. It will be recalled that
as early as 1709 Bishop Berkeley believed
with the convergence of the lieyes, furnished a sign for the distance of the object
fixated and therefore gave it the appearance of existing in a third dimension. The
precise cue employed would have to be the
muscle-sensations involved in these reflex
the present day. After the invention of the
condition of their images (blur and disparity) which may concurrently produce
thick a lens, the process is in all likelihood a sort of back-and-forth or trial-and-
optics and the study of acuity as a maximum of definition or resolution. It seems
stereoscope by Wheatstone in 1833 and the
possible that these terms can be analysed
lost some of their importance as cues for
depth, but the problem continued to attract interest (19), Present evidence, however, makes it doubtful that they furnish
is sensitive to stimulation of this sort in
reason to believe that it can be similarly
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
edge, or texture and contour, may plausibly
geometrical condition of the image, so also
Is the Gradient of Blur a Cue for Distance? The accommodation of the lens
which eliminates blur at the fovea necessarily produces- blur in outlying regions of
the image when the environment is a terrain or has a floor or walls. Physical
parts of a surface at greater or lesser distances than the point of fixation will tend
gradient of increasing blur over the surface similar to the gradient of density of
texture and the gradient of disparity? If
for the impression of continuous distance?
the center of the visual field, but it does
field have the same fuzzy character whether
their objects are nearer or farther than the
the gradient of crossed to uncrossed disparity with which it is always associated
doubtful; the writer's efforts to obtain a
were not successful. It can hardly, therefore, be an effective independent stimulus
eye is accommodated for any distance beyond a few feet the gradient of blur be-
comes a very minor matter. All of the field
except that directly under the nose tends
limitations of the camera in this respect
it is, probably, that a gradient of texture
Image. It is now possible to return to the
problem of the relationship between acuity
of the subject that visual acuity is defined as the smallest visual angle that
unless they are analysed geometrically, they come down to this: that acuity
analysis of an unblurred image provided by optics employs
the concepts of ray and point, of the focal
all light from a single point converges to
other conditions a pencil of rays forms a
more or less extended figure in the image
instead of a point, the circle of confusion,
M. Mohler of Smith College for the computations
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
however, and it seems likely that analysis
in terms of area and intensity within the
this standpoint, a focused image would be
one in which the transitions from dark to
light were as abrupt as the adjustments of
with gradients (in this case microgradients,
would be that definition or resolution of an
image is the degree to which the gradients
of light intensity within it are as steep
for the external and the optical set of conditions of
to understand the dependence of acuity on
the retina and the brain, the neurological
research on visual acuity by psychologists has been concentrated on this question (95), but it is outside the scope of our
gradient of intensity would be the condition corresponding to the sharpest visual
contour. A series of alternating gradients
as steep as possible would be the condition corresponding to a clearly perceptible
texture or surface, both in the case of a
case of one with fine microstructure. The
ability to see a very small spot, gap, or
acuity, would also depend on the formation
of the pair of gradients involved, that is to
In all that has gone before, full illumina-
vision, however, depends on a bright image
as well as on a focused image; the ability
to see detail falls off rapidly as the light
above formula is also consistent with this
inasmuch as the gradients of intensity in
an image become less steep as the intensity of its brightest spots is lowered.9
The outcome seems to be that the texture, detail, and pattern of our visual perceptions, on which their spatial character
steps of luminous intensity in the retinal
image. The large scale gradients of detail
based ultimately on small scale gradients
of the intensity of light. Although such a
formulation of the matter is tentative and
incomplete, it has the virtue of bridging the
on a rotating disk, that a regular and uniform increase of light-intensity along a
(77, p. 217). An impression of abruptly increasing brightness, a margin or border in
on the relation of small areas illtensity is
referred to in Bartley's survey (6) `end in a
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
referred to in Bartley's survey (6) `end in a
acuity, would also depend on the formation
texture or surface, both in the case of a
tion corresponding to a clearly perceptible
creasing brightness, a margin or border in
as steep as possible would be the condicreasing brightness as one might expect
tion corresponding to the sharpest visual
gradient of intensity would be the condi-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
incomplete, it has the virtue of bridging the
not only with an abrupt increase of lightintensity along a dimension of the retina,
but also with an abrupt change in the rate
of increase along a given dimension. This
principle illustrated in Figures 40, 41, and
dients, known as aerial perspective. As a
margin or border is given in experience by
either a step in the level of luminous in-
step in the first differential of luminous in-
tensity (a change in the rate of change).
of ordinal stimulation. The retina responds
Abruptness seems to be the critical condition. Perhaps the function of the retina
theory that it responds to light rays and
gradients and their differentials instead.
The retina is probably to be conceived as
vision, we might conjecture, all the existing variations within the retinal image
have been utilized as stimuli for perception if they are consistently in correspondence with the actual lay of the land.
since Leonardo da Vinci first described and
named it four centuries ago. The color of
a landscape which stretches off toward the
horizon becomes bluer and more filmy with
increasing distance. The fact is that the
constituted by pencils of light which have
travelled through differing amounts of air.
At the extreme top of the image the light
may have passed through only a few feet of
(corresponding to the horizon) the light will
have passed through many miles of atmosphere. Owing to differential scattering of
wavelengths, the color of the light reaching the eye differs under these two conditions, even though the color of the reflecting surfaces may be identical. The simplified explanation sometimes given is
that just as the sky itself is blue, so also
shifted from its proper quality toward blue
increasing blueness in the visual field is
a true stimulus gradient unless it can be
shown independently to yield an impression of continuous distance. The same
thing would be true of a gradient of haziness.
has apparently not been studied in isolation. The change of color is not simple
with the full range of color variations. It
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
can grades of, say, texture density, and it
is therefore doubtful that the color gradient
could prove to be as effective a stimulus
as the texture gradient. Aerial perspective depends on the amount of haze in the
day. It is certainly not discriminable in
a gradient of aerial perspective is not a
stimulus in the proper sense of that term.
indicator, or sign of distance. If, as seems
possible, the gradient is not always consistently in correspondence with the actual lay of the land, it is only reasonable
to suppose that it should suggest the impression of distance, as red suggests
warmth, without compelling the impression
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
related to the surfaces of the environment
in a geometrical way as are linear perspecNeither are
gradations of shading intrinsically connected with the geometrical shapes of
directly connected by way of their orientation to the source of light. The advancing
and receding colors which painters employ
to bring an object'out from or back behind
with physical depth by any clearly understood principle. One might speculate that
not produce the same compelling impression of depth that gradients of texture,
line, size, binocular disparity, and motion
produce, just because they are not related to physical depth by geometrical
respect than it has usually been given 10
is necessary only to give up the expectation of finding in it replicas of the
neither an object nor an experience of that
tween them. What we have failed to under-
stand is that this stimulus need not look
like either its cause, the object, or its
effect, the experience. It need only be a
laws as the latter are. Variations in hue
and brightness can and do produce compelling experiences of outline, form, and
features of the visual world are accounted
pattern in the two dimensions of extensity,
and changes in gradients of light-variation. Variations in texture and size, in
stimulus as compared with the richness of
has been concerned appear, when analysed, to be adequate to account for the
each eye to be an array of steps, gradients,
with the dimensions of the physical world,
According to a leading textbook of ophthal-
mology by Duke-Elder (30, p. 764), the defects
of the normal eye as an optical instrument are
and even aberration found in ordinary lens
systems are effectively corrected in the human
eye. This fact is in contradiction to a fairly
widespread impression that the eye is a poor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Gradients of Deformation of the Image During
visual perception for the most part as if
position. The normal human being, however, is active. His head never remains
in a fixed position for any length of time
except in artificial situations. If he is not
walking or driving a car or looking from a
train or airplane, his ordinary adjustments
of posture will produce some change in the
slight movement of his camera during exposure will shift the image on the film,
for it ruins his picture. The same kind of
shifting of the image on the retina occurs
all the time during vision, with the dif-
ference that vision is enriched rather than
has a very different function than has the
as an unchanging distribution of grains of
metallic silver on a film, but as a flow of
changes will modify the retinal images in
a quite specific way. Just as the image of
the terrain in the right eye differs from that
Motion of the retinal image relative to the
therefore a normal stimulus-condition for
vision and one which is almost continuously present during waking life. It must
a half inches. Both effects are similar in
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 52. Successive Views of a Row of Fence Posts
and is also a precise sensory correlate of
locomotor behavior; the latter has no such
one which deforms the image; the latter is
parallax (shift) of each post decreases as
image of the posts undergoes a horizontal
skew which can be specified mathematically.
The Gradients of Deformation of the Image
the reader will fixate an object across the
room and then move his head or change his
field, and this corresponds to the deformation occurring in his retinal images. Like
blur, double outlines, and the other characteristics of the visual field, this lively
shifting of contours is visible only with
practice, since what we ordinarily experience is the visual world, which does
drive a car or ride on a train does it become
so strong as to be unmistakable. A better
open in front of one's eyes and then moving
image on the ground glass screen presents
a striking contrast to the stability of ordinary visual perception.
known for a long time and has always been
included in the list of indicators by which
It has often been described as it appears
from a moving train. Helmholtz wrote about
Suppose, for instance, that a person is stand-
ing in a thick woods, where it is impossible
for him to distinguish, except vaguely and
roughly, in the mass of foliage and branches
all around him what belongs to one tree and
what to another, or how far apart the separate
trees are, etc. But the moment he begins to
move forward, everything disentangles itself,
and immediately he gets an apperception of
the material contents of the woods and their
relations to each other in space, just as if he
were looking at a good stereoscopic view of it.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
conclusion is indicated by the fact that,
....objects that are at rest by the wayside..
appear to glide past us in our field of view in
the opposite direction to that in which we are
advancing. More distant objects do the same
bodies like the stars maintain their permanent
positions in the field of view.. Evidently,
under these circumstances, the apparent angular velocities of objects in the field of view
will be inversely proportional to their real distances away; and consequently safe conclusions can be drawn as to the real distance of
conclusion" about the objects in the field
The relative motion he described is a variable of the retinal image
itself when the latter is considered as a
projection of the terrain or as the projec-
tion of an array of slanted surfaces, the
retinal image is not a picture of objects
but a complex of variations. If the relative motion is analysed out and isolated
proves to be a lawful and regular phenomenon.
it is potentially a stimulus correlate for
an experience of continuous distance on a
longer is required to postulate a process of
unconscious inference about isolated objects.
in a motion picture view, an unnoticeable
side to the other, being seen .as a deformation of the walls and corners of the room.
The distortion of the still picture of the
room from normal perspective is not great
enough to be noticed, but the slight change
moving ,,,,h e camera lens is noticed easily,
and it,, appears as an apparent stretching
he would be during normal locomotion. Let
the horizon, that is, let us disregard for
either in pursuit of the gliding terrain or
things appear to an observer riding in an
this experience from distracting memories.
stars, and all the field of view upward are
tivity to this kind of visual stimulation,
that is, motion consisting of a change in
is not like that of a river as it would appear from a bridge but rather as it would
appear in perspective from the bank; it is
sisting only of a change in location. The
that term. In whatever direction one looks,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
forward, to the side, or behind, the flow
vanishes at the horizon. There exists, in
short, a perspective of this motion which
is fundamentally similar to the perspective
of the density of texture and the size of
which any element or object flows is inversely proportional to its physical distance from the observer, as Helmholtz
noted. The motility of the world, like its
like that illustrated in Figure 30 for orgeometry of
ground change their angular direction from
the observer (parallax) more rapidly than
words, a continuous gradient of the velocity of the ground "going by" from a
maximum at the bottom of the visual field
surprising to discover that the direction of
flow in the projection of the ground during
same way the velocity does. We are referring to the visual field, of course, in
direction of flow depends upon the physical
varies like the pointer of a compass. The
direction of the line of locomotion are objective directions which cannot be literally
To be specific, the flow of the terrain is
looks ahead from the driver's position; it
is to the right as one looks to the right, or
to the left as one looks to the left, and it
is upward in the field as one looks behind.
In other words, it is different in different
visual fields of fixation as these vary from
visual fields in turning his head around to
the right the direction of flow changes successively in a counterclockwise rotation,
and if he turns to the left the change is
Descriptively, the visual field ahead expands outward from a focus, the visual field
the visual field to one side or the other
visual field ahead while driving a car, and
the contracting visual field while riding on
flight. In Figure 53 the focus of expansion,
or point of aim, is on the horizon, and the
diagram would be the same in principle for
a man on foot or for the driver of an automobile. The surface as projected is continuously deformed in the manner indicated,
the velocity and direction of flow of the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 53. Motion Perspective in the Visual Field Ahead
FIGURE 54. Motion Perspective in the Visual Field Looking to the Right
If the arrows are reversed, this becomes the visual field looking to the left.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
creasing velocity from the bottom up to the
direction from the midline to either side
and the sky is not deformed since it is not
a determinate surface. If the direction of
the arrows were reversed to make the field
contract radially inward instead of expanding radially outward, it would then be
familiar to passengers on trains and airplanes. On the picture the velocity gradient is similar to the gradient of linear
vanishes on the horizon, so long as the observer is fixating the horizon. Actually,
Figure 54 should be visualized as merging
the reversal of Figure 53 on the right to
yield a combination of visual fields which
cannot be projected on a plane picture. If
the scene would represent the visual field
looking 900 to the left of the line of loco.
It is interesting to note that if we could
combine all these two-dimensional projections of a three dimensional visual
world into a single scene, we would obtain a two dimensional space, in the geometrical sense, which is non-Euclidean.
of a sphere considered as a two-dimensipnal surface, i.e. it would be boundless
tually come back to the position from which
it started instead of travelling off endlessly in the same direction. In other
words, if human beings had a visual field
if they could see all the way around at the
and close in behind in a rather astonishing
manner. Such characteristics of the visual
field created a great deal of difficulty for
the early students of perspective and for
sector of the visual world on a picture plane.
peculiar attitude of psychologists, artists,
reason, perfectly content with the visual
world as it is normally perceived, conforming to the rules of Euclidean geometry.
The world does not undergo any flowing de-
formation; it is seen to be stable and rigid
in a single direction in three dimensional
relation to the observer; the observer sees
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
...-".."' ".'...2."%jr53kVE.4":+7ft. '''' .,..
The Directions of Deformations in the Visual Field during
Forward Locomotion, as Projected on a Spherical Surface around the Head
his own change of position relative to the
objects. This flowing deformation then in
the visual fields we have been describing
is nothing but a visual symptom of the gradients of velocity and direction in the
for perceived space and perceived locomo-
server does not look where he is going, he
can in a sense see where he is going. This
fact enables strollers, automobile drivers,
are invariable accompaniments of locomotion if the observer keeps his eyes open.
The focus of expansion in the field ahead
is -an exact indicator of the point in the
world toward which he is going; a shift of
the focus goes with a change in the direc-
directly ahead of them, although admitted-
with a sense of a point of aim. The point
of aim is, in fact, implicit everywhere in
practiced in moderation. So strict are the
geometrical relationships between physical
motion of the observer's body and retinal
the latter provides in fact the chief sensory
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
oneself to be looking vertically downward
at it from a considerable altitude during,
level flight would be in general a flow from
the top to the bottom of the visual field.
point physically below the airplane, at the
center of the visual field, and would decrease outward in all directions toward
field. The direction of flow would be diver-
gent at the top of the field, away from the
focus of expansion, and convergent at the
contraction. If the directions in the field
however, that this downward looking visual
field would have to be accompanied by eye
movements, the effect of which we have not
when the observer looks vertically upward
ordinal stimulation of the retina, but only
luminous stimulation. There is no texture,
no surface, no motion, and accordingly no
supposes the stimulus of retinal texture,
as we pointed out at the beginning of this
into a cloudless sky gets the impression of
flying are provided by the motion perspectives of broken cumulus clouds when passing through them. If, as frequently hap-
pens, the clouds take the form of a solid
horizontal overcast or ceiling, the flow of
this surface will be precisely the inverse
of the flow on the ground, as represented
question must move its head from side to side
in order to obtain the cue for depth. Moreover,
visual field has so far been described with
the limiting assumption that the observer's eyes are fixed on the horizon and
on the horizon and, since all other parts
of the world are flowing, they are seldom
surface is a stimulus-variable whereas relative
displacement is conceived only as a cue. The
seneral theory of retinal deformation as a type
The difference between this description of
motion perspective and the established conception of motion parallax is that the former is
allied to locomotion of the organism whereas
the latter usually implies that the animal in
the retinal gradient of velocity on a ground
of visual kinesthesis covers all special cases
jerks as he fixates points on the flowing
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 56. Motion Perspective with an Overcast or Ceiling
FIGURE 57. The Gradient of Flow Looking to the Right
when the Observer Fixates a Spot on the Terrain
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
in other directions to pick up objects of
eyes of a traveller seated on the righthand side of a moving train make an endless series of drifts to the right and jerks
to maintain the image of a sele cted moving
spot or object at the center of the retina.
is to establish a new fixation, and they occur in the act of scanning the environment,
in reading, and between the fixated pursuit
gradient of retinal flow which we have asserted to be a geometrical correlate of
The problem is similar to the one encountered in connection with crossed and
uncrossed retinal disparity as a correlate
image might be supposed to be quite different from that when the point of fixation
result in these two cases are equivalent.
The reader may check this observation for
himself, with a piece of ruled paper on a
table top substituting for the terrain. It
constant velocity toward the left, in the
sense of vector addition, to the gradient of
velocities to the right shown in the former
the point of fixation, F, formerly possessed, but in the opposite direction. The
decreasing flow to the left is equivalent
to the former gradient of increasing flow
and the gradient of motion remains constant
on the retina whether the zero point of the
gradient corresponds to the horizon, to a
point halfway down the terrain, or even to
same sort. Figure 57 represents the diagram of Figure 54 as it would be modified
down. This is the scene frequently observed from a train window. The point of
fixation is indicated by F. At this point
point F; all points above this line flow to
the left and all points below it flow to the
know from physics that motion is relative
not ordinarily perceived as relative to an
visual world provides an absolute zero and
hence there is an absolute sense of motion
or rest with reference to the ground both
for oneself and objects. This fact is what
motion in physics difficult for the nonphysicist to comprehend. Only in ex-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
out of a train window at an adjacent train
which fills the entire visual field) does it
ever become equivocal whether the observer is moving and an adjacent object
is at rest, or whether the opposite is true.
In. such circumstances there is no terrain
motion can occur for an observer in a com-
pletely dark room who is presented with a
summarized in 32). In fact, with no visual
both motion and position of the point become
stationary point may appear to make random excursions in any direction. This is
Its explanation, as Koffka understood ((,7),
horizon of motion is not a limiting value,
image varies on an intensitive scale with
foregoing descriptions and diagrams of the
deformation of the image apply only to the
case in which the movement of the head is
in a line parallel to the material surface
projected. Although this applies to normal
locomotion with reference to the ground, it
stimulation the point may as well seem to
move as not and therefore sometimes does!
movement of the head with reference to the
is to add a constant to the motion of each
gradients which are its essential characteristics. The variable which corresponds
must therefore be a gradient of motion-ina-certain-direction, not a simple gradient
retinal image is a line which is determined
by vanishing values of the stimuli of size
and texture, and it has no intrinsic relationship to the gradient of motion. The
latter gradient may have a kind of horizon
of its own at the anatomical level of the
fovea, that is, at the midline of the retina
slanting surfaces of objects. A particularly important practical application is to the
is no mere visual luxury to be enjoyed in
instead of moving parallel to it, a modification of its deformation is introduced
in that the focus of expansion is no longer on the horizon of that surface but at a
lision with the surface. The rule is that
all deformation in a forward visual field
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
aircraft carrier, the direction and rate of
combination. The velocity increases outward from the focus but then decreases
we move into it, and the focus of expansion provides us with a point of aim for
travel, regarded as a patch of color, enlarges as we approach. It is not difficult to understand, therefore, why this
and approaches zero at the horizon. Figure
58 illustrates the field of a flier who intends to land on a runway. The gradients
and rate at various points. All velocities
expansion should be a stimulus for sensed
locomotion as well as a stimulus for sensing the lay of the land. The behavior involved in steering an automobile, for instance, has usually been misunderstood. It is
less a matter of aligning the car with the
made shallower the focus will move upward toward the horizon. It is therefore
an indicator for the pilot as to where his
proaches it at a slant, the flow is correspondingly asymmetrical, the velocity
Inasmuch as either alternative is frequently
fatal, the pilot has a vital interest in such
cues. The working out of their interrela-
a pilot comes into an airfield or on to an
FIGURE 58. Gradients of Deformation during a Landing Glide
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tions was a part of the research on avia-
Complex discriminations of the direction, altitude, and angle of flight, whether
incorporated in the reactions of the pilot,
discriminations that are learned, not the
retinal image of the novice flier is exactly
difference is that the latter reacts differentially to variations of the image to which
the former does not. The experienced pilot
than the novice but he sees a more differentiated visual world. The effect of
his training is to enable him to make fine
rather than gross discriminations of dis-
tance, altitude, angle of glide, angle of
direction of everything, and therefore to
in which he himself moves with precision.
In this sense, and only in this sense, is
more to say in the next chapter. Learning
to attend to novel features of the world, to
explore it, is something which psychologists do not understand at present. What
the pilot cannot be supposed to learn is the
impression of depth, distance, and altitude considered as an inference derived
Stimulus Variable for Space and Locomotion.
theory of the retinal motion gradient as a
stimulus for distance perception requires
that an artificially produced gradient of
point-motions on the retina, in isolation
from other gradients, will yield an observer the impression of continuous dis-
inspecting the environment, habits having
up and performed as an experiment, inasmuch as the gradient of velocity has not
toward introspection, the analysing and describing of such appearances in the visual
field is almost absent in the literature of aviation. A notable exception is Langewiesche's
book, Stick and Rudder, which describes and
illustrates the visual cues for landing in a way
consistent with the theory here presented, and
is full of acute observations on the space per-
perspective. An interesting method of attack on it would be with frame-by-frame
photography of spots, lines and other tex-
ceptions of the flier (70). Pfaffmann is another
ture-stimuli, that is, by animation of pictures. Such evidence as does exist comes
tional binocular cues experimentally (87).
exception in that he has analysed the tradi-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tional binocular cues experimentally (87).
exception in that he has analysed the traditures. Such evidence as does exist comes
ceptions of the flier (70). Pfaffmann is another
ture-stimuli, that is, by animation of picis full of acute observations on the space per-
consistent with the theory here presented, and
photography of spots, lines and other tex-
illustrates the visual cues for landing in a way
book, Stick and Rudder, which describes and
field is almost absent in the literature of avia-
scribing of such appearances in the visual
inspecting the environment, habits having
In this sense, and only in this sense, is
point-motions on the retina, in isolation
in which he himself moves with precision.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the space perception of fliers and on the
use of motion pictures to represent space.
One goal of this research was to find out
how' effectively the perception of a three
flat motion picture screen and by the two
dimensions of a still photograph. It became evident that both still and moving
pictures can yield a more adequate visual
understood. The theories of texture-perworld
plane during an approach glide (Figure 58)
and project it on a screen, the projection
can be studied in two ways. The experimenter can plot by rough measurement
trained fliers or of untrained persons and
out, the notable result is that no observer,
trained or untrained, perceives an expanding screen picture and nothing more. Each
moving through space in a specific direction toward the ground. The angle of this
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
is true, but nevertheless judged. The experiment was often repeated and the experience proved to be sufficiently reliable
to justify making a series of such motion
picture shots into an experimental test for
flying training, and even for measuring one
aspect of the proficiency of trained pilots
picture shots taken from moving aircraft,
including views at right angles to the line
of flight, yielded the conviction that the
gradients of motion we have described are
genuinely compelling for the experience of
distance. Many of the phenomena of animated cartoons point to the same conclusion. When children observe Donald
taining the same shape, it is likely that
they actually see him whizzing off into the
motion, so far as locomotion is correlated
with visual stimuli. It would clarify the
matter if we could classify the different
with reference to that surface. One possibility is for the projection as a whole to
a stationary delimited part. All three of
motion is one of translation or one of ro-
tation or a combination of these, but not
one which involves any change of shape or
distribution. A square which moves across
the retinal surface, whether it moves with
tracing arcs of circles, remains a square.
the retina keeps the same distribution although it loses old and gains new parts at
What we have been talking about, however,
is the movement of the observer and the accompanying deformation of the environ-
rigid kind of motion relative to the retina
has an analogy with the motion of physical
been little investigated. Our concern has
solid rather than liquid suband it is the kind analysed in
laws of motion. But it is not the only or
even the most frequent variety of motion-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
definable in terms of gradients of velocity
and direction along one or another axis of
of motion which has been termed deformation. As with rigid motion, deformation
may apply to the retinal image as a whole
tion can be put into a very simple correspondence with the physical situations
which produce them. Motion of the retinal image as a whole occurs with saccadic eye movements from one fixation to
another, the head and body being stationary. Motion of a delimited part of the
object in the physical environment moves,
angles to the line of sight.4 Motion of the
angles to the line of sight. (The perceptions resulting from these latter two modes
of stimulation are surprisingly equivalent).
head of the observer moves in relation to
the ground (locomotion). Deformation of a
angles to the line of sight. The relationships can be summarized in the form
Actually, the retinal motion is non-deforming
only when the object crosses the line of sight.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
understood as individual cases and not as
combinations, and the resulting perceptions will also apparently coexist without
own movement and at the same time perceive the movement of a car approaching
the clarity of either perception. The deformation of the total image, considered
as a set of gradients, appears to lose none
sensations of flat color, each spot having
an elementary quality of location, implied
always be analysed into a change of location of a color in time. Visual movement
gether, they need not do so. The clearest
demonstration of this fact is the negative
fixing one's gaze at a waterfall for ten or
twenty seconds and then staring at another
part of the scenery. It is sometimes observed out of a train window after the train
the apparent expansion of a rotating disk
as to make the line appear to move outward from the center. The after-image of
motion is confined to the stimulated area
of the visual field (like an after-image of
color) and it consists of a vivid impression of motion in the opposite direction,
gradually dying out. The fact to be noted
from the waterfall the foliage appears to
was not a simple but a complex experience, the sense of location being the pri-
relative to the window. After the rotating
tract, but it does not get smaller (although
it may yield a queer impression of receding or retreating from the observer). One
The localization theory of space-perception, it has already been argued, was
than in this corollary. For, strange as it
may seem to someone who has not observed it for himself, an impression of
center of a semicircular screen (a perimeter) and presenting motion in an area or
window at the far periphery of his visual
field. He may sense the motion correctly,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
any impression of what the moving pattern
might be, and even without any impression
of what the direction of the movement is.
An even more notable example of this kind
order but neither the adjacent series nor
or "compact" as the number-theorists say.
In short, the essential stimulus for motion
posures of two separated black spots will
optimal, however, the impression reported
correlate, not a copy, of the corresponding
instances together, it seems certain that
there must exist a visual quality of what
no longer a paradox if this rule is applied. One has only to relinquish the assumption that a stimulus must be a re-
A combination of successive and adjacent order over the retinal mosaic would
seem to be the fundamental stimulus condition for this impression of motion. The
stimulus may be complex, in a mathematical
can exist in its own right independent of
to which it will prove to correspond. The
exact definition of this stimulus variable
remains to be established. One fact about
it, however, can be stated with some certainty: the stimulus for motion is not
To put it more precisely, it is not necessary to have the stimulation of a continu-
ous series of adjacent points at a continuous
event, as the paradoxes of Zeno ultimately
image in order to yield phenomenal motion.
The Perception of Acceleration as Distinguished from the Perception of Notion.
be distinguished from the perception of acceleration or force. Perceived motion of
by vision, whereas perceived acceleration
the same thing, are mediated by stimulation from within the muscles (the muscle
sense) and stimulation from within the inner ear (the labyrinthine sense). The
or within the body, and also insensitive to
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
hand the inner ear is extremely sensitive
inner ear and of the receptors in muscles
do not provide a kinesthetic sense in the
and many kinds of tool-using would all be
is behavior accompanied by the perception of moving from one place to another.
As experienced, it includes sensory impressions of exertion or muscular action
and of visual motion, the two being covariant. The product of these stimuli is
something neither wholly motor nor wholly
visual; it is locomotor action in a visual
next chapter, the perception of a stable,
joints, is a better mediator of the motion
upright visual world also depends on covariation of the visual sense with the socalled body senses, and subsequently we
locomotion and the stability of space are
about under his own power, he experiences both motion and force. The perception of voluntary locomotion, as dis-
the inner ear on the other. In the study of
neither of these sources of stimuli can be
airplane is a relatively passive action compared to walking, and for the passenger it
locomotor machines. The muscular actions involved in steering, accelerating,
or balancing an airplane with the stick are
psychomotor behavior, for example operat-
ing a crane or a lathe, is only a special
violence to the accepted meaning of the term
"kinesthetic" will be extended in Chapter 13.
The above distinction applies only to bodily
own body, and the visual stimulation becomes proportionally much more important
latter have been studied by A. Michotte in La
tion also makes possible a better understanding of a kind of movement of the
achievements, automobile driving, flying,
acceleration and motion, not to the motions and
forces perceptible among visual objects. The
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
rotation, as distinct from active explora-
tory rotation of the head, is an artificial
ments in isolation from the other, as many
situation not met with outside a laboratory.
ceived a great deal of experimental study,
initial rotation of the head, the acceleration and the retinal motion are concordant
during the stopping of this rotation, after
an interval of uniform rotation, the acceleration is reversed and becomes negative, although the retinal motion continues
in the same direction during this period.
amount as to preserve an unchanged visual
field, thus compensating for the rotation.
As rotation continues, the eyes jump with
more, repeating these slow and fast movements as long as the rotation continues.
with a sense of his head moving in it. Ac-
negative acceleration, and this afternystagmus may even persist after the
head is physically at rest. If the eyes are
open this kind of eye movement inevitably
produces an illusory motion of the environment.
rotate in the direction opposite the bodily
tually this is the result, but only if the
an observer is whirled in the usual rotating-chair experiment, the compensatory
fixations and the stability of the visual
ject is rotated in partial darkness or in
of light should be particularly strong, and
portance since this is the situation that is
encountered in night flying. Graybiel and
is stimulated by accelerations which affect
the inner ear as well as by retinal motions.
his associates have studied this situation
and described what they call the oculogyral illusion which, like the after-nystagmus, is produced by compensatory eyemovements not having any compensatory
In this artificial situation the two kinds
of stimulation necessarily come into conflict. The compensatory eye movements,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Together with other illusions due to acceleration in night flying
maneuvers, it may help to explain the occasional disorientation to the objective
three dimensions usually includes the following factors: linear perspective and the
of one contour on another or the covering
of a far object by a near one, the distribution of light and shade over an object,
the relative motion of objects or monocular
parallax of motion, aerial perspective and
the loss of detail with distance, binocular
disparity, or stereoscopic vision, degrees
of ocular convergence and of accommodation of the lens, and occasionally the
factor of angular location of an object between the bottom of the visual field and the
Brightness is sometimes listed as a cue to
distance, the presumable assumption being that
an object necessarily appears darker as its distance from the eye increases (19). Apart from
the little-known effects of atmospheric condiaerial perspective
assumption has no basis in physical fact. It
is true that a point-source of light yields an
proportion to the square of the distance. But
an illuminated surface (an infinite number of
theoretical points of light) yields the same
intensity per unit solid angle at the eye when
it is far as when it is near, and hence possesses the same brightness, within limits, under
both conditions. Each theoretical point becomes theoretically dimmer, but the density of
points becomes theoretically greater in exact
proportion. In the ordinary environment of il-
skyline or, in other words, the amount of
ground between the observer and the object (19, p. 270).6 Sometimes these fac-
tors are called signs or criteria of distance or, more frequently, cues. Whatever
the term used, it is clearly implied that
they are not precise geometrical correlates
of physical distance but probable indicators, symptomatic rather than exact.
In the attempts to describe these factors it has often not been clear whether
are three quite separate classes of facts
a near one, for instance, is a description
phrased, since it presupposes the phenoone
one side of it appears near and the other
The fact is, however, that in a dark room
with no other sources of stimulation the more
highly illuminated of two equidistant and
otherwise equivalent surfaces tends to look the
nearer. This is an empirical fact which has
nothing to do with optics. It is not easy to
account for. It does not imply that brightness
is a clue, indicator, or sign of distance; it only
poses a problem. So far as the writer knows,
this empirical fact has never been observed
except under darkroom conditions where distance is relatively indeterminate and where
presumably the impression of distance may be
affected by minor determinants which are inoperative
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
to their components and precisely specified. They need to be analysed in terms
of (a) the retinal image and (b) the corresponding impression in the visual field.
underlie the principal cues for depth have
are retinal gradients and steps of ordinal
stimulation and that they are geometrically precise. As stimuli, they can be tested
for exact correspondence with impressions
world. If they are stimuli, it should also
be possible to put them in correspondence
with impressions in the relatively depthless visual field. In common terminology,
first correspond with gradients of adjacent
stimulation on the retina; the second with
abrupt rises or falls in such stimulation.
The varieties of perspective can be listed
gradual increase in the density of the fine
structure, the spots and gaps, or the extended pattern of either a part or the whole
of the visual field. There is a great variety
exist. The increase in density may run in
any direction but very often it runs upward
turns into an impression of depth or distance during ordinary vision. This type
versed by the argument that the perceptual
crease in the size of the shapes or figures
in the visual field when it is considered
poses contours, or figures on a background,
when they are not seen as depth and distance? What are the features of pictorial
vision which parallel the three-dimensional features of normal vision?
perspective when contours are rectilinear.
(the size or dimension) between either out-
the perceptions of distance or depth over a
lines or inlines in the visual field. Since
the edges of things in man-made environments are so often straight and since
straight lines are easy to draw, this kind
of perspective is the one we have learned
to notice and pay attention to. It has been
illustrated in Figures 36 to 38. All these
perspectives can. decrease to a zero limit
with the perceptions of depth at a contour
of size or spacing(or to a maximum density
useful substitute for the list of the cues
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 60. A Road Slanting Down and then Up
Can you find two gradients of converging lines in the drawing in addition to the gradient
for horizontal converging lines? The picture was constructed with three different vanishing-points. (Adapted from H. Buckley, Perspective. London, Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons,
is, introspectively, a line at which these
perception of a continuous surface such as
size (or the increase in density) gives way
texture, therefore, goes unnoticed. It is a
spacing, size, and density. There results
kind of perspective corresponds is a gradient of the horizontal skew of one retinal
image relative to the other, i.e. of the relative disparity at a given point. Both the
perspective of double-images in the visual
field and it is almost impossible to observe
except at contours. The continuous change
as illustrated in Figures 48, 49, and 50.
For any given plane surface there is a line
to the direction of change and which alvisual field.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
4 ....r.:;; rit; '-...1.44. 1; i,t 4'..441.'
FIGURE 61. Two Scenes at Five Feet From the
Ground and at Twenty-Five Feet From the Ground
The views on the left were taken at the height of a man standing, those on the right from a
high ladder, but at the same spot on the ground. Note that there i s a steep gradient of
density in the left-hand photographs and a moderate gradient in the right-hand photographs.
Note also that the more moderate gradient of density, in either case, produces an impression of a surface less inclined to the line of regard than the steeper gradient. Since
the surface is interpreted as being level, the resulting impression is that the point of regard has moved upward. The right-hand photographs locate the observer high in the air,
looking down. AnOther instance of the relation between the point of view and the slant of
the surface is given later, in Figure 70.
change in the rate of displacement of texture-elements or contours in the visual
direction through zero-to motion in the opposite direction, and it also has a vanishing
line, at right angles to the gradient, which
passes through the center of clear vision.
and spacing, the perspective of motion becomes easier to specify and describe. In
that event the rate of deformation in the
visual field simply decreases from the periphery toward the center of the field. The
directions of the motion radiate from and
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
directions of the motion radiate from and
passes through the center of clear vision.
phery toward the center of the field. The
line, at right angles to the gradient, which
visual field simply decreases from the peri-
posite direction, and it also has a vanishing
that event the rate of deformation in the
direction through zero-to motion in the op-
and spacing, the perspective of motion be-
change in the rate of displacement of tex-
the surface is given later, in Figure 70.
looking down. AnOther instance of the relation between the point of view and the slant of
gard has moved upward. The right-hand photographs locate the observer high
rethe surface is interpreted as being level, the resulting impression is that the point of
surface less inclined to the line of regard than the steeper gradient. Since
moderate gradient of density, in either case, produces
moderate gradient in the right-hand photographs.
The views on the left were taken at the height of a man standing, those
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
toward a pair of opposite poles (Figure 55)
which are specific to the physical motion
of the observer himself. The resulting per.
spective of expansion, skew, or contraction as the case may be is not difficult to
observe, but it strongly tends to pass over
be called perspectives of parallax whereas
perspectives of position. Next to be listed
are three which are independent of the observer's motion or position.
Aerial perspective. This is an increase in haziness, blueness, and desaturation of colors over the visual field.
perspective it is variable with the conditions of illumination and it does not rest
on the geometry of optics. For this reason
it seems improbable that it will ever prove
to be a stimulus for the impression of distance, although it may be an indicator.
decrease toward the center of clear vision
texture elements and contours in the visual
field. It is difficult to observe since the
out-of-focus quality is never at the center
of vision for a normal eye. When the lens
is accommodated for any considerable distance, however, the gradient of blur tends
to level off so that one may doubt whdthet
it could serve as a univocal stimulus for
the impression of distance. It is important only because it is more fundamental
which are sometimes still listed as a cue
visual field. It has occasionally been suggested that the amount of background the
of the field and a given object is a clue
for objects represented in pictures. Obviously, however, the clue is valid only
terrain rather than a wall or a ceiling. It
serves mainly to illustrate the fact that
the effective stimulus gradients in outdoor
field does not correspond to any gradient
the retina on which a gradient of stimulation might occur. We shall recur to this
The foregoing eight varieties of perspective all have reference to distance
There is another fundamental kind of distance perception, however, which was
field contains only patches of color. What
are the differences between these colorareas which yield depth?
of texture or the spacing of inlines which
is sudden rather than gradual (Figure 41).
It is usually coincident with a change in
brightness or color in the visual field such
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
looking at a valley beyond the edge of .a
doubled than those on the other side. The
contour itself may be seen in single imagery (as any contour is when it is horizontal in the binocular visual field). When
attitude he sees that side of the contour
occurs during a movement of the observer's head and consists of more rapid
to move across the background. If part of
the contour (the bottom usually) does not
move across the background that part appears to be in contact with the background,
or resting on the ground. The shift in rate
of motion at a contour goes with a perception of one surface behind another, and
the amount of retinal shift is theoretically
an exact stimulus for the perceived distance between the surfaces.
objects is actually not a clue to the depth
of objects but a perception which requires
explanation. A man knows that a near object can partially obscure a far object but
his retina does not, and the retinal explanation should be sought first. The preceding three factors supply
superposition. There is no texture, double
FIGURE 62. One Object in Front of Another
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
imagery, or relative motion in these drawings. They suggest the principle that the
more complete, continuous, or regular outline tends to be the one which looks near.
Is completeness, then, a sign or clue for
12. Completeness or continuity of outline. We can reasonably assume that, if
objects tend to have regular outlines, completeness, closure, or continuity7 tends to
be associated with the near side of a com-
associated with the far side. At the visual
and an intercepted object the side belonging to the completed outline usually has
the coarser texture, the greater relative
motion, and the greater crossed disparity.
Consequently, a visual contour in isolation from these sensory shifts suggests
Besides continuous distance and depthat-a-contour there is another major feature
of the physical surface at the corresponding
gradual change of rate is the projection of
density of texture it should also hold for
the slope of these gradients is also geometrically linked to the slant of the surface projected (cf. Chapter 9). A supplementary explanation for the modelling
of the visual world, however, is provided
by the relation of light and shade to the
convexities and concavities of the environment.
of adjacent regions within the visual field
produces a contour, which is the necessary
condition for a segregated shape or form.
A shape in the visual field is coordinate
rule is complicated, however, by the fact
that there may occur shifts in brightness
which produce not contours but the model-
surface, its protuberances, indentations,
corners, curves, or flatness, is something
this modelling of the world is probably the
slant of a bounded surface: that the rate of
change of texture-density at any point in a
projected image is proportional to the slant
ness differences which we call differences
Ratoosh has given a mathematical formulation to the phenomenon of the continuity of an
outline at its intersection with another outline
fectly understood, are not the same qualities in perception as white and black. The
color of a surface and the illumination of
it are perceived separately, although both
energy of the retinal image. Whatever may
The slant of a surface, in this context, is
its slant with respect to the line of sight not
the line of gravity. It is the angle of confrontation of a surface.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
considered a stimulus-correlate for depth
quality of shape in the third dimension as
distinguished from its shape in two dimensions. This fact has been illustrated in
The relationship between these transitions of shading and the corresponding
curved surface and an abrupt transition an
angled surface, or corner, but whether this
on complex factors. The geometry of light
and shade changes as the direction of the
The traditional cues for depth, to summarize the last two chapters, can be restated as variables of the retinal image.
They can also be described as they appear
and can even be called sensations so long
as one is careful to remember that they are
and not the causes or elements of perception.
space. The remaining five are better conceived as probable signs, secondary to
the others, or as having doubtful status.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
retinal images are the basis of the visual
been the subject of the preceding chapters.
Our experience of things is stable, upright, and unbounded although by rights it
should not be so since neither the retinal
was only priovisional and it should now be
images as affected by exploratory eyemovements.
as much as its depth, impels most of us to
world not go shooting about as the observer shifts his fixation from one object
the conviction that it is there and is not
an illusion or a picture is its stability.
problem, as he was of nearly all the other
Bishop Berkeley's doctrine that the world
was all in our head by the simple argument
of kicking a stone. He implied an ultimate
was typical of his general theory: one sees
objects as not changed because one learns
confidence that things are sensed as they
view of this stability can the instability
retina with every movement of the eye, be
to regard the retinal shift as merely the
"sensory expression of the ocular movement" which actually corresponds to no
change of the objects (53, III, p.63). This
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Now is thNottithe Chu iiinteltdothisktigeofflomeall good men
FIGURE 63. Successive Superpositions of Retinal Images
The problem can be formulated in different ways and it involves a set of related
seem that a quick and easy way of solving
it would be to reply that the question asked
is meaningless. To speak of the world, or
of objects in general, as being displaced
visual world is a response of the organamazingly complex but still a
reference to the tactual world, that is, to
the perceived surface felt by one's feet.
not occur during normal exploratory eyemovements?
indicate fixation-pauses. The dotted ellipses represent the region of clear vision
immediately adjacent to the fovea. During
a single second of reading, three fixations
of the eye may occur, and the retina will
have been stimulated by a complex of three
during eye-movements do not fuse with one
a film or retinal after-images, but are integrated in a very different way.
visual field continue to have a fixed direction-from-here when the corresponding
over the retina. The absence of blur during
saccadic eye-movements might be explained as due to a momentary central inhibition
(56; 121, Chapter 23), but this would not
There must exist some compensatory effect
If the series of displaced retinal images
Whatever neural process initiates the jerk
of each eye from the old to the new fixation
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
used to be called the "local sign" of every
anatomical retinal unit. This innervation
geometrical terms, to add a constant displacement of opposite sign to the whole
anatomical pattern of excitations or, what
What the physiological correlate of local
signs or of reference axes might be we do
are mobile relative to the head, the head
relative to the body, and the body relative
to the ground, and we know that the posture of all these organic systems with
respect to the ground is maintained by reflex mechanisms. A chain of reference is
thus provided by which an absolute stand-
ard of "straight ahead" might be established.
this has been recognized by psychologists
for a long time (53, III, p. 570). As here
formulated, it implies that a saccadic eyemovement involves both the neural activity
shift of the image over the retina, which
The movement of the eye and the movement of the image are by necessity reciprocal. A combination of two processes
each reciprocal to another is obviously a
might then account for the non-displacement of the visual scene.
obtained by trying it against a number of
visual experience, the theory states that
when the eye actively rotates to the right
the scene should appear to be displaced to
the left, but that it is not displaced because there is a compensatory shift to the
right which cancels it. (Only a single eye
(1) If the eyeball is mechanically rotated toward the right the scene should ap-
according to the theory, because the compensating shift is absent. The reader may
be able to verify this prediction for himself by pushing his eye with his finger.
right after a clear negative after-image has
been established in the center of its field,
the after image itself should not appear to
move at all because it is not displaced on
the retina; according to the theory, however, it will appear to be displaced to the
present with no retinal motion to be cancelled. This result is a matter of common
grounds of retinal stimulation but, according to the theory, it should move to
to the right is present, as in the last experiment.
Helmholtz (53, III, p. 245). If the central
neural mechanism is normal, a patient who
tries to move his eye to the right in these
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
circumstances has an illusion that things
If the eyeball is mechanically rotated to
the right after a negative after-image has
been produced in the field, the after-image
any compensatory effect. Only if one assumes some such nonsense as that visual
sensations are projected outward from the
their centers like a couple of radio dials.
should it move at all. As nearly as I can
observe, the after-image in this experiment
left, as in the second observation. Helmholtz, as one might guess, observed this
phenomenon too, although he did not interpret it, and his report is that the afterimage does not move although the screen
directional stability of the visual world
might be a product of activities which are
the sensory centers for retinal motion. The
visual world then could possess a standard straight ahead direction-from-here and
a constant direction at all other points.
light of its history (67, p. 384 ff.) and suggested an explanation essentially similar
world is stable in another respect in addition to direction. The world always appears upright and, little as it may seem so,
this is actually a very curious fact. The
Although the contours and edges considered as color-patches within the visual field
usually appear to tilt under these circum-
their sockets a few degrees to compensate
to put a twist in the optic nerve. Why then
lies on his side or puts his head in an abnormal posture he gets two forms of stimulation which vary concomitantly, first,
pull of gravity both inside the inner ear
p. 303). The gravitational and the visual
prove either that visual stimulation was a
primary and posture a secondary determinant of upright vision or vice versa.
to vision or vision prior to posture is like
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
have been guilty of it, including the writer
Koffka, (67, p. 213 ff.) believed that the
upright character of the phenomenal world
despite a tilted image was explained by a
of the image (floor, walls, horizon) to become the reference-axes on which an impression of tilt would have to depend. He
Wertheimer (118) that if an observer keeping his head upright looked through a tube
at the surface of a large tilted mirror, the
tilted scene gradually righted itself in perception and, after a period of time, looked
normal. This observation has been questioned, however, by the writer who repeated but could not verify it. He pro-
tilted but the physical environment was upright immediately determined the vertical
world. The main lines of organization are
seen as the main directions of space. The
alone, accounts for the vertical and horiappearance of things, and that
axes on the retina the nervous connections of a hypothetical pair of lines engraved on the retina are no explanation
retina is a myth. But our visual sense of
visual sense of texture or contour, cannot be ascribed to the prevailing main
order in the image might explain a contour
but not the orientation or direction of a
The visual vertical and horizontal (when apprehended correctly) have
reference to the direction of gravity. The
direction of gravity is reliably indicated
by postural stimulation, in ordinary life.
world nor its stability can be understood
if we confine our attention to a shifting,
of space are inseparable from the feeling
of the ground under our feet and the feeling of standing up, of moving about, and
stimuli which arouse these feelings ordinarily co-vary with the visual stimuli
neither visual nor postural. It is not that
with our muscles, but rather that we both
written in collaboration with Mowrer, has
already been referred to. It made the error of assuming and trying to prove that
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
postural cues were logically and genetically prior to visual cues in determining
perceive an upright visual world. A motor
theory of the perceived vertical and horizontal was proposed. The evidence considered was taken from experiments on
conflicting visual and postural cues, the
of them must be the true basis for the experience and the other must be secondary.
a visual theory have recently been knocked
thought was the true vertical. Their experiments show that when the direction of
the postural vertical and the direction of
the main lines in the visual field do not
coincide, the usual result is not a complete domination of either but a somewhat
observer's perception of the vertical depends on the circumstances and on the
observer. The implication is that postural
and visual stimulation are both determinants of the upright character of the
as they are in voluntary change of posture in a physically normal environment,
perception of the vertical remains correct
one another by an ingenious experimenter,
or in the "haunted-swing" of an amusement-park, or during the act of banking
an airplane, the perception of the vertical
objectively incorrect. In this situation,
the organism is forced to search for reliable cues to the direction of gravity, and
the perception is objective only to the extent that reliable cues are discovered and
used. The flier, for instance, usually has
to learn that the objectively reliable cue
in banking an airplane is the visual horizon. He always has to learn that the objectively reliable cues in night flying are
a valid question, of course, and it might
stimuli for space perception, as it is asked
about cues or clues for space perception. Brunswik gives it great emphasis
visual perception (15). The neglect of it
in the present book stems from an intention to concentrate on the theory of those
spatial perceptions for which the determinants are supplementary to one another,
not discrepant, and for which the stimulus
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Transposition of the Retinal Pattern. The theory of a reciprocal effect
ly, what is transposable on the retina is
event of physics and optics can be under-
brain implies a set of localized excitations
field relative to its margins also implies a
set of localized excitations. But then why
are the steps and gradients of excitation
unaffected by the displacement? The difficulty was first formulated with reference
was why a square could still be seen as a
forms. It led first to the doctrine of form-
gradients of variation, and the inflections
stable visual world. As stimuli, therefore,
The paradox goes deeper than the equivalence of a square; it is the identity of
the retinal image itself which comes into
pattern of excitations. Steps, gradients,
and inflections of a gradient are mathematical facts which are the same no matter
adjacent nerve-cells an increase in excitation from one cell to the next is a kind
without causing a permutation or an inversion of the order. The set of numbers
..345.. are similarly equivalent in order to
the set of numbers ..789.. but not to 987
but not solving the problem, it provided a
point of departure for the whole of Gestalt
of configuring or organizing the excitations
What, exactly, is a stimulus? Physiologists and psychologists often assume that
capable of reacting specifically to an order of excitations? Can a perceptual impression correspond to what seems to be
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
it is a kind of physical energy acting on a
is known of it, suggests that the effective
events and almost the whole of our knowledge is founded on judgments of "greater",
"less", or "equal" (102). Change, variation, and relation are no less abstractions
than is adjacent order. Perhaps the concept of ordinal stimulation only makes
We must not forget, of course, that there
is a fixed anatomy of the retinal receptors
and that the appearance of the visual field
bears witness to it. A transposable order
is not, then, an abstract, timeless form of
an order of adjacent anatomical elements.
The Transformation of the Retinal Pattern. The retinal image, as we have seen
in the first part of this chapter, may undergo not only a transposition but also a deFIGURE 64. Successive Transfor-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
it undergoes deformation whenever the head
on perception is an impression of subjecMathematically, this
were, stretches but does not tear the form.
Transformations are usually represented on a plane, however, whereas
is related to the hypothetical image on a
vision, and it is conceivable that the clue
to the whole problem of pattern-perception
of the retinal image the requirement that
'According to Courant and Robbins (25), any
mapping of one figure on another by either a
central projection or a parallel projection (or a
succession of such projections) is a projective,
transformation. In such transformations straight
lines are invariant, intersections are invariant,
and the order of points is invariant. Lengths
and ratios of lengths are altered, but the ratio
of two ratios of length (the cross-ratio) is invariant.
Cassirer has suggested that the geometry of
destroy the pattern as one might at first
study of the invariant properties of geometrical forms which have undergone trans-
cannot claim to be an expert in either of
general application of such principles to
the deformation of the retinal image during
attempted, so far as I can discover, by any
can be applied to a given pattern without
affecting certain of its general properties.
The skull of a chimpanzee can be transformed into the skull of a man, as D'Arcy
simple geometrical operation (105,p. 1085).
can be endlessly and gradually applied to
a pattern without affecting its invariant
properties. The retinal image of a moving
transformations provides a solution for the
puzzle of perceptual constancy. But he assumes
that the process of perception must necessarily
involve a search for constancy, an objectifica-
tion of sense data, or a discovery of the in-
variant properties of shapes which have undergone transformation (21). What he suggests is
that the mind transforms the retinal images,
whereas the suggestion above is that transformations of retinal images are equivalent as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
(Redrawn from D'Arcy Thompson,Growth and Form (Macmillan, 1942)
principle. Perhaps the clue we are seeking lies in the invariant properties of such
viding the stimulus basis for a stable and
stimulation exists, and hence we probably
cannot fall back upon it for the whole of
a continually changing retinal image. Only
these properties would be capable of pro-
comes back to the same spot, puts his head
at exactly the same point, and fixates in
tinuity, points to points, and straight lines
properties of lines. The features that are
perceives the same environment throughout
his wanderings. He also, of course, perceives his wanderings. If the retinal
undergo a continuous transformation perhaps we can account for both his visual
understand the geometry of the transforma-
tions of the retinal image in order to explain why its successive changes can all
be equivalent for perception. The changes
co-vary with muscular action during active
preserved the mediators of the visual im-
include not only the adjacent order which
successive order which it equally presupposes.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
stable is actually related to another problemwhy it is unbounded. Ordinary visual
perception is not delimited by an oval-shaped
boundary, nor does it have a clear center
and a vague fringe. These are the characteristics of that unusual kind of visual experience, the visual field, which we get
are reflections of the optic anatomy: the
are extremely mobile organs. In the activities of everyday life the center of clear
times a minute, and during reading or while
driving a car the rate of fixations will exceed this figure (121, Chapter 28). Can
above characteristics in the visual world
uniform clarity and its possession of what
depth and distance of the visual world can
The Function of Saccadic Eye-Movements. The movements of the eyes have
century since Dodge invented a photographic method for recording them objectively and described their fundamental
types (26), a great deal has been learned.
The shifts of fixation when we look at pictures, for example, have recently been
shown in Figure 66. Note that the fixation
point moves all over the picture, but not
in an orderly fashion. There are frequent
zigzags and irregular jumps. No simple or
order of fixations and the order of elements
the perception of patterns and two-dimen-
The eyes might be supposed to trace the outlines of things and
theory is that the composition of a painting is something which enforces a particular sequence of fixations in the onlooker,
another by the spatial order of lines and
masses in the painting. It is widely believed by artists and art critics. But the
theory cannot be literally true in the face
of the illustration given, and if there are
obscure relations between pictorial corn-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 66. Successive Fixations of the Eyes in Looking at a Picture
(From How People Look at Pictures, by G. T. Buswell (Chic-
405,i':.4,k'5,,,,i1.5,,,t,,N0a 45,,',a1AFt545" 4,5,51
Si444 V ,555,,a) as', 4,v lai 4:',i5 a.',N,.'1'").44,,,,p0)40444s
%,.104,4, *51, ''', 5" 445,a4,4s.1144, sa ,s' a'V,v
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
suggests, for vision in general, that the
sequence of fixations is more or less random, and that each single fixation tends to
fall on an object of attention (rather than
the background) and on a point of interest
saccadic eye-movements is probably not that of perceiving or
appreciating any kind of order in the retinal image. It is more probably to enable
us to register the environment in two ways
which, in the use of a camera, are mutually exclusive. Eye movements enable us to
vision for fine detail. The eyes function
very wide-angle camera lens and a telescopic or narrow-angle lens. \X ith the
Helmholtz understood some such function as this. The intent of vision, he said,
is to see as distinctly as possible, with
both eyes, various objects or parts of an
object in succession (53, III, p. 56). The
sole purpose of the mobile eyes is to permit a kind of light-absorptive pointing.
parts of the environment in each eye cannot be performed. We cannot move our
eyes evenly and slowly across the enWe cannot move one eye upward and the other downward. We cannot
the lenses. We cannot hold the eyes still
rotates. All we can do is to let our astonishing ocular reflexes take care of the
forget the total retinal image. What gets
centered on the fovea are successive small
regions correspond to the so-called objects of attention or points of interest.
It is therefore not true to say that what
centers of which are registered by the nervous system in fine detail.
that the visual world cannot be perceived
fixation such as yields a momentary visual
The product of these successive impressions, however, is such that, paradoxically, all awareness of the succession has
visual world depends on a temporal series
of excitations and just as unquestionably
call space and time are not as distinct as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
overlapping images. At the level of experience we have a panoramic world, all
parts of which are concurrent. In ordinary
contrasted with auditory perception, where
visual object does not, although its patch
foveal region. At the circus, for example,
look at the performing seals, pause to observe a clown, and return to the tightrope
Although you have had a succession of impressions the events are
multiple stream of events than it is like
overlap and, to that extent, are transpositions of the just-preceding images.
Instead of saying that the visual world is
based on a succession of images, therefore, it is possible to say that it is based
retinal image may be defined as a pattern
or as a process. The problem, accordingly, may be formulated in two ways. First,
how are successive patterns on the retina
Successive excitations of the retina must
world arise except through memory of justpast glimpses? The kind of memory required to explain perception is not, of
term. It is often called primary or immediate memory. It is the kind of memory
a melody. Its similarity to perception has
striking parallels between such experiences as visual patterns and auditory
and repeat them immediately as if we were
or eight, however, we begin to have trouble,
and are integrated to a single experience.
present does not seem to be a point where
the future meets the past but a considerable range of events. Although the concept
the study of auditory perception, it must
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
unit for telling a story. It is no accident
compensatory displacement mechanism already described. The result would be a
stance, persons and places can be created
by successive camera views if their sequence is consistent with that of natural
apprehension rather than that of some arbitrary logic. Just as the visual world
clarity like that observed from the center
point directly behind the head (depending
recency, and hence the visual world can be
might be, we do not know. Each momentary excitation might be assumed to leave
but the working out of a complete theory of
successive traces is faced with many difficulties (67, ch. 10-13). Even a theory
the eidetic image, and the image of imagination is lacking, and the relation of
these to the after-images and other after-
the situation must be represented in some
is not sufficient for a clear understanding
of the situation; the fixations of the camera
on the points of interest must conform to
an onlooker to look around in a new situation before he narrows his attention. The
instantaneous cut from one shot to another
effects of prolonged fixation is unknown.
vices for representing a time-lapse. Between the heroine bound to the railway
compare the integration of the visual world
with the way in which a series of motionpicture shots builds up a scene. The first
film artists. A shot, which may last only
makes the time of the two events simultaneous. The alternating order of shots
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
to motion-picture cutting would be to de-
termine the sequence of fixations which an
really occur. What would he look at first,
camera must be allowed for. Such a formula might serve as well, however, as the
obscure intuitions and traditional practices which govern most film-making, and
it has the virtue of being subject to experimental study.2
motion pictures. The novelist, and in fact
all artists but graphic ones are confronted
to produce a series of impressions which,
for the reader, the hearer, or the observer,
creates an objective world flowing in objective time. A successive order of im-
were possible, to define the retinal image
as a continuous process in time and leave
the memory images entirely out of account.
a visual field, for instance. If we were to
immediate memory could the past excitations be held together to yield the impression of motion. We would have to conclude that motion is never perceived,
perceived, but not motion. This conclusion
world is satisfactory for a stationary observer but the case of a moving observer
Dtscussions of film-montage, such as that
of Eisenstein (31), have been concerned with
the dramatic effects of successive shots rather
than the effect of a coherent world in time.
The former, however, surely depends on the
latter, and the simpler problem should be
motion corresponds to a variable of retinal
stimulation. The variable is a correlation
raises no questions as to whether the impression of motion is based on memory,
inference, or the interpretation of eyemuscle sensations. We need not assume
any short-circuiting in the brain such as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
(118), and we need not decide, in an outmoded terminology, whether motion is a
sensation or a perception. We only suppose that it has a stimulus-correlate.
throughout the last two chapters. If it is
valid for the movement of a patch of color
across the retina, however, why should it
not also be valid for the continuous deformation of the retinal image? If it is,
position like a blind man feeling an object on different sides in succession, and
from one point to another in the environment (as its possessor goes about his
we are committed to the position that succession is just as much a property of
visual stimulation as distribution. More-
serial transformation which, as a series,
is unique to the path travelled. The series
over, if successive order participates in
waking hours; any momentary cross section
short interval of time, why should it not
has interesting implications. Let us first
is specific to the momentary position and,
over a long period of time, the serial image
will have sampled the light flux at a great
panoramic series and the locomotor series
define the physical environment in which a
mobility selected, this might be his house,
given physical point in such an environment there is one and only one ocular
the principle holds for either eye we need
not refer to the second image.) If the eye
rotates at that point in its peculiar saccadic fashion the images are individually
the flux of light is unique at that point
are combined, as they must be if an observer both scans his environment and
any given point of view. It will not only
will be something very much like objective
and is extended in a third dimension with
called a train of momentary images, but we
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
series (related by continuous transformation) must be combined in the same train.
although it is abstract, and if it is not a
apprehending it. To the abstraction on the
side of experience and behavior there must
the side of physical stimulation. Tracing
the latter may be difficult but the attempt,
public world is not an absurdity, however,
abstract and so strange that to call it a
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The Constancy of Perceived Objects with Respect to Shape
of Perceived Objects with Respect to Size .
The Perception of Distance and of Scale . .
Size Constancy Break Down at Great Distances?
Conclusion: The Objectivity of Experience
that this explanation is not the true one.
Birds, for example, can discriminate correctly between a large and a small object
when the larger object is so much farther
away that its image is smaller. Does this
their distance from the observer, and the
same shape at different angles of regard, or
from different points of view. It is true, of
field and subsequently a three dimensional
visual world. The behavior of animals and
not hold, but then, we have argued, you are
having a different kind of visual experience.
birds suggests that they react differently
from the outset to objects at different distances. We may suspect that the so-called
problem of constancy is actually only one
this constancy of objects in ordinary uncritical perception has been that we correct our sensations of the size and shape
to original sensations there are indications
of the perception of the visual world with
all of its objective characteristics. The
aim of this chapter is ultimately to show
that the question of why things retain their
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
sizes and shapes under different circumstances is a false question. Only if it is
believed that perceptions begin as patches
of color in a visual field does the question
in Chapter 2. The visual world, it will be
remembered, differs from the visual field
or distance, and it includes the experience
constant. Third, it is stable and upright;
things as seen have constant directionsfrom-here when the observer moves his
horizontal when the observer tilts his head.
Fourth, it is unbounded; our experience of
the world does not have any visible margins or limits such as the visual field or
a picture has. Finally, it has a characteristic to which we have scarcely referred
but which, in a way, is the most important
of all: it is composed of phenomenal things
world is primarily an array of spaces, sur-
faces, and contours, it is secondarily an
for the perception of the material world,
solidity, and any theory of space perception must at least recognize this fact.
can we now account for with a stimulustheory of perception? We may begin at the
meaning of things, surely, cannot be explained solely by their optical stimuli.
Nearly all, if not all, meanings are learned
individual to the next and from one culture
that different people do not even perceive
the same world. We usually realize, however, that such a statement is an exaggeration. The world we refer to is the world of
values and meanings rather than the world
of such meanings are incorporated in those
same shape, at least approximately, by all
problem in Chapter 11. Before we can investigate why things have meaning, however, we must know why they are seen as
present, that the solidity and separateness
of things must develop in the vision of the
shape, size, and color does he learn their
significance for his needs or their use as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
variable of the stimulus or , more accurately, that sequence and arrangement are coordinate dimensions of stimulus variation.
This is a plausible but abstruse assertion,
stimulating to the imagination but not immediately productive of clear-cut experiments to prove it. The alternative hypothesis is to rely on the more familiar conceptl of memory. The explanation would
glimpses of the environment are integrated
momentary, fails to account for the pano-
The distance,. depth, and solidity of the
visual world have been considered in detail. They tan be explained by stimulation
surfaces. Continuous distance is in correspondence with certain gradients in the
retinal image of a surface or the combined
images of two eyes. Depth at the contour of an object which stands out from
an abrupt step in these gradients. Solidity, or depth-shape, is in correspondence
their variations in slope. If these types
We have seen that the stable and upright character of the world can be successfully explained by stimulation if we
of psychophysical correspondence are upheld in future experiments, the gradient
theory can be said to explain the tridimensional properties of visual percep-
take note of the body as well as the eyes.
shift of the retinal image and the movement
moves around it. Perceptual objects, instead of being deformed as the color-
of the eye to its new fixation are then in
tilting of the retinal image and the deviation of the body or head from its normal
The fact that physicists have found it useful for certain problems in astronomy and in
the structure of matter to assume that time is
is suggestive for psychologists but is apt to
lead into high-sounding guesses. There may
be a significant parallel between problems of
relativity physics and problems of visual stimulation, but until the latter have received a
mathematical formulation the tracing of the
the ground or the floor, and for any segment or part of the background. We shall
find some evidence that it also holds for
though the corresponding color-patches in
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the visual field be shrunken, expanded, or
dimensions to remain constant is a fact of
that measured dimensions remain constant,
but this is a fact of geometry and engineering, not of perception.
these facts. When it is asserted that the
world we tend to perceive is a threedimensional Euclidean space, the assertion really means that the dimensions of
things and of their interspaces tend to remain constant in perception.
main subject of this chapter. By implication, however, the problem is not limited
to objects in the literal sense but applies to the whole of a visual scene, to
the ground on which objects normally rest,
light energy is perhaps the most basic fact
colors can be seen only under the artificially controlled conditions of the laboratory
or the color transmitted through a pane of
ground glass in a dark room: they are.disembodied colors floating in a visual field
rather than the colors of objective surfaces in a visual world. They look filmy
colors of objects in daylight illumination
which appear to be localized on and to be
part of the surface of the object in question. The latter are known as surfacecolors, whereas the former have been
colors, reduced colors, and the like (61).
its brightness correspond with the intensity of the light on the retina.
the colors of the patchwork in the corresponding visual field. The untrained ob-
world which is consistent with our actual
a landscape painter can, for he has had to
learn that the disembodied color of an object is the color which must be reproduced on his canvas. Just as a table top
might consider briefly the nature of color
perception. Although- colors are tradition-
ally supposed to be sensations, and although the correspondence of hue, bright-
white surface in shadow cannot be represented as white. In pictorial vision
perception remain fairly constant despite
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
parts of the world and despite changes in
the illumination of the whole world between sunrise and sunset. It is as if the
colors of objects in perception corresponded to the chemical and physical
properties of their physical surfaces independently of how well these are lighted,
light-intensity of the retinal image. Perception seems to deviate from its stimulus
show "regression toward the real object."
This is, of course, a valuable achievement
for the perceiving individual insofar as it
helps to identify objects at dusk or in deep
proposed to explain this tendency in perception, based on the assumption that the
disembodied color is first aroused in the
not, however, the only possible assumption. One might suppose that a disembodied color corresponds to light stimulation without ordinal stimulation and that a
surface color corresponds to light stimulation with ordinal stimuli for a determinate
visual world. Both types of correspondence would be strict, but the latter would
involve more variables and would be expressed in a more complex function. As
as we argued in Chapter 6, may be considered an elementary depth-shape. Al-
the left side is lighted and the right side
the same color on both surfaces? Possibly
brightness of the retinal image yields an
at the same time yield an impression of a
would actually be if the protuberance were
outer margins.) The alternative is for the
bright-dark stimulation on the retina (in
disparity) to yield a protuberance, but in
that event the perception is of both sides
the natural kind and the introspective kind,
demonstrated that two different attitudes
experiment, the objective attitude and the
The latter is critical, analytic, or photographic, and is directed toward the stimulus. The two attitudes are not mutually
exclusive, for there may exist intermediate
the observer from the objective to the subjective attitude is sufficient to reduce
even to destroy comphenomenon of color-constancy" (79, p. 45). Henneman demonor
strated that the objective attitude yielded
(62 per cent) while the subjective attitude
(25 per cent). The writer's interpretation
of these facts would be that in the first
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
world whereas in the second case he tended to see a visual field.
broader than the problem of perceiving the
whiteness of the shaded side of an object. It includes the perception of the
different levels of illumination or in artificial or colored illumination, and the perception of surface hues as well as blackThe experimental eviwhite qualities.
dence is voluminous and there are difficult
to the subject is provided by MacLeod (79),
color-constancy is intended to be this: that
ties out of which vision is built tend to\
slants, and edges. Color as it is embodied in space is affected by spatial
basis for spatial stimulation. The innate
attribute of extensity which color has been
have handled it and erhaps even measured it or, if not, that we know the laws of
physics about all material objects, including unfamiliar ones.
a great many of our perceptions, including
particular kind of perception is questionable. Conceivably the rigid object has a
correlate in retinal stimulation even though
every part undergoes a continuous transformation as the observer moves about.
The images of objects, moreover, are deformed when the objects move with reference to the observer (page 34).
you walk up to a mailbox to post a letter, for instance, the projected shape of
transformations shown at the top of Figure
68, and when you face a door that is being
opened, its image is transformed as in the
mailbox and the door retain the same shape
the simplest kind of space but merely in-
long as you see them as part of the visual
still possess their proper shape in three
knowing the mailbox and knowing the door?
An answer can be given only by experiment and only by simplifying the situation.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
stract from the perception of mailboxes and
surrounding the object are often flat cardboard screens, or something equivalent,
and frequently the environment is darkened. Neither the object nor the observer
object would be a rectangle or an ellipse
cut out of cardboard. Third, the shape to
be judged is reduced to the flat outline of
with respect to the line of sight. What the
observer has to judge the particular dimen-
sion of this outline which, being slanted,
the altitude of the rectangle or ellipse.
is provided for the judgment. Fourth, the
outline to be judged is chang.ecLlayt-lae,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
experimenter on successive trials so that
tks...obaerver cannot become familiar with
would be projected on a picture-plane. If
the object, and the slant of its surface is
he is asked to pay attention to the projected shape his judgment is still more
altered in a randEirinicanner from one trial
to the next. The conditions of perception
significant result of all these experiments
compressed, but it seldom or never reaches the true projected shape. If the cues
the judgment may approach the perspective shape.
result is that we do not have to be fami-
The index is zero for a perspective judgment and 100 for an objective judgment.
Is it not true, however, that this index of
Knowledge and past experience of the object in qu
n are not essential for constancy. The constancy of its dimensions
see it in three dimensions. For the parti-
the flat face of a solid object this means
our ability to see the slant or tilt of the
There is another result of these experiments which has seemed even more significant and which has therefore received
observer takes a critical attitude toward
These conditions are fairly typical for experiments on constancy of shape. The most
recent is that of Stavrianos (100), whose report summarizes the earlier work.
an index suggests that one is measuring a
perceptual process and that this is superimposed on a primary sensation of shape.
figuratively speaking, corrects the sensation. It implies that the visual field is the
visual world is a perceptual accomplishment of the organism.
planation of the experimental results, what
The basis for an adequate theory has been laid by Koffka
not experienced in isolation; it is always
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
An effort to verify this theory has recently been made by Stavrianos (100),
idea was simply to determine whether observers who failed to perceive the tilt
correctly also failed to perceive the tilted
judge the rectangle as just so much shorter than it was. This determination proved
to be not as easy as it might seem, and the
The trend of .the results, however, especially in one experiment, was consistent
pression which the square face of an object would undergo if it were slanted
outline is said to be foreshortened, that
is, it is shortened along the fore-and-aft
which serves as the axis of rotation. The
texture of this surface is represented as a
checkerboard, the size of the units of texture being much exaggerated, in order to
illustrate that the same optical compression which affects the outline also affects
stated in Chapter 6, thattb.e..-catinal_gra.
dient of density in the image of a physical
bears a constant relation ...........,....
slant of that surface. ..-Thteepness.....of
the gradient is proportional to t fie_dgre_e
of shape as a kind of disembodied geometrical form and to think of depth as a
however, is an outline attached to a surface, and the kind of depth which is
'understand the seeing of a shape in depth.
JExperimenters have simplified the general
deal with the outline of one flat face of an
object, but they have not thereby eliminat-
and the impression of slant are embodied....I
of slant, ---ra-..--EB-6----artection in which the
tion toward which the surface facia,,s. The
principle was_intenriPri toapply --to- any_
variety _of_.yisual textuze.-.-. .from ...the. finest
of a texture gradient in a certain direction,
then, is a potential stimulus correlate for
perceived slant. The steeper a gradient of
will be the compression cf the texture, as
3The slant of a surface may be defined with
reference to a line of regard and a surface perpendicular
this plane y rotation on a horizontal or a vertical axis.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
projected image relative to the other. The
the face of an object is foreshortened when
the outline is foreshortened. Although the
especially in the case of surfaces with a
important for the perception of slant. If
the outline of the tilted object in Figure
instead of a square, the one-way compression of texture would still yield a perception of slant although the foreshortening of
then be perceived, and this result is ac-
tually what occurs when the experiment is
Other gradients than that of texturedensity are, of course, supplementary
dients of binocular disparity and of motion.
The cues of disparity and motion are sup-
posed to yield depth rather than slant, but
a gradient toward crossed disparity running from the far to the near margin of a
slant of that surface (Chapter 6, Fig. 49).
gradient of motion over a physical surface bears a constant relation to the slant
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
of that surface. In general, the greater the
the greater will be the impression of slant.
of motion, however, are not primary ordinal
stimuli. The first is dependent on different
simultaneous projections registered in two
ent successive projections registered in a
single eye. One is a gradient of the relative skewness of the two binocular images
when the two are equal. This is true because the elements are compressed along
with the dimension. The amount of surface perceived, therefore, will be in
proportion to the dimension of the surface
If you ask, "Why is the retinal compression not seen?" the answer is that it
special effort to disregard the slant. (Some
impression of slant, however, is normally
compelled and the observer therefore cannot see all the compression.) Without the
and the other a gradient of the deformation
of the image. Both presuppose the existence of a retinal image possessing an out-
special effort, however, the retinal compression yields an experie
line and usually possessing texture. Both
constancy experiment if the observer looks
periment are such that the texture of the
with one eye and holds his head motionless since this leaves only the bare outline and the texture as the stimuli for
still be evident if the density of texture is
The tendency to perceive the dimensions of things as constant, therefore,
the gradients of disparity and motion are
background may come to be the only remaining variable in the retinal image, and
dimensions of a surface, but the proportions of a pure depthless shape
ject is a very poor indicator of the size
retinal image of an object is a poor indicator of the objective shape (15). So far
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
cator of the objective shape (15). So far
ject is a very poor indicator of the size
dimensions of a surface, but the proporsions of things as constant,
maining variable in the retinal image, and
still be evident if the density of texture is
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
large and far off. The cone of light rays
which enters the eye and is focused as an
image does not differ substantially whether
yards. Figure 70 illustrates this principle.
other and placed at four times the disenlarged to
the same angle on the retina just as they
do on the photographic film, and this fact
projected side by side. The letters on one
chart, consisting of E's in various posi-
tions, are just as distinguishable as the
In the right-hand scene, when the observer puts his head in exactly the position to
another. In the left-hand scene, however,
the chart on the right appears to be much
legibility of its letters remains the same.
steeper the gradient of convergence over a
surface, according to our hypothesis, the
that is, the more it, ill look inclined to
the line of sight.4)bserve the floor of the
the second scene one appears to be looking dawn at the floor, relatively, whereas
in the first scene one appears to be looking
more nearly along the floor. These gradients, in combination with others on other
surfaces, establish a point of view in each
of things in spite of variations in their
distance has frequently 13w studied under
on the problem generally involve the setting up of an unfamiliar object such as a
stick or a cardboard square at a considerable distance from the observer and a
series of varying comparison objects at a
server's task is to judge the size of the
With a naive attitude, and under favorable
is then said to be complete. This accuracy, however, is only possible if there are
object. When the cues are reduced or eli-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 70. Two Objects with the Same Visual Angle
minated from the scene, correct judgments
such thing as an impression of size apart
case of an unfamiliar object, its size is
Figure 71 illustrates the two definitions
One ought really to speak of size-distance
perception, for the two are "linked together," in Koffka's words, both optically
and perceptually. The question is, how is
the impression of distance obtained? Since
different cues for the distance of each object must correct or compensate for the
different retinal sizes. It is easy to under176
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
stand why cues like accommodation, convergence of the eyes, binocular disparity,
and superposition received all the empha-
relative skew provide a continuum of distance in which the distance of each object
is then fixed. The gradient theory undertakes first to explain how continuous distance is visible and second to account for
is necessary, how is the distance of an object fixed on the background? Let us assume that an object is seen where its conat that
distance and no other except when depthat-a-contour brings it forward in distance.
This latter effect is produced mainly by a
step in the rate of deformation or disparity
sis in this theory, for the objects are represented as if suspended in empty space.
How the empty space is seen gets no explanation unless one assumes that distance is computed in the brain by a
being an exercise in trigonometry. In the
lower drawing the same objects are represented as if resting on or attached to
ject as a background for the objects; the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
rA,-----L-.--4'-471.- --.7,--\ \ \ \ -' NS:,::`,..........,
.Z-...:::-------- -L----!.-k-77--- 7-::c.......--- ^,
E-i--_---------,.... :-..:----_ ?--------E4_.--
FIGURE 71, Two Objects of the Same Size but Different Visual Angles
terned cover on which two white oblong ob-
motion or stereoscopic depth a contour is
seen on the background. This would explain why, in the monocular vision shown
in Figure 71, the object appears where it
physically is instead of nearer and smaller within its cone of rays.
jects appeared to rest, one large and far
One is free, of course, to assume instead that an object is seen resting on or
either at rest or physically attached to a
surface. Although the effect of past experience no doubt contributes to the explanation, it is not a necessary assumption.
The former hypothesis can be tested experimentally. Figure 72 represents a setup for doing so. The upper photograph is
on the left, and one smaller and nearer on
through a small hole in a large screen at
angle of view was approximately as represented.
smaller and nearer, as can be seen in the
second photograph. It is simply a cardboard rectangle raised about three inches
from the table-top by a rod which is invisible to the observer. Its distance is
identical images at their respective dis-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 72. Distance as Dependent on Contact with the Background
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tances, so that the two images in the upper picture are physically the same size.
cue is studied in isolation, as it would be
or a probable indicator of distance, not as
jects with both eyes and to move his head,
increase of distance upward in the visual
field, the stimulus gradients on walls and
tends to do so, when monocular motionless
that a perceived object under these condi-
tions recedes within its cone of light rays
The evidence of the size-constancy experiments is not entirely summed up in
the conclusion that the size of an object
tends to remain the same at different distances. Some of the experiments point to
a more general statement; they imply that
the dimensions of things, large or small,
are comparable at different distances. This
general formula comes closer to describing
higher up an outline is placed within the
frame of a picture, the farther away it will
This is the recognized cue of relative upward location in the visual field. Of two
upper will appear to be farther away. The
explanation is probably that a blank background suggests a terrain or floor
more strongly than it suggests a wall or a
present to vision whereas a wall or ceiling may not be. "Upness" is therefore a
faiily reliable cue to the distance of an
object in the visual field, given the principle of contact with the background and
treme case we might take a flier looking for
for ten or fifteen miles in any direction in-
cluding the one directly below, all being
very large to very small such that we can
not only when two trees are equal in width
but also whether one tree is half, or twice,
or three or four times the width of another.
Size perception, to describe it accurately,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
it is something we carry around with us and
it is implicit in the very process of perception; it is therefore not to be confused with the conventional scale of
ground at the point to which it is attached,
are so related to one another that with increasing distance there goes an unvarying
scale. This is the rule for ordinary per-
scale is a psychologically complex affair,
ception of the visual world. If the observer tries to see the world in perspective like a flat picture, however, the relation between them is the same but the
impressions are different: with unvarying
pieces of wood or metal. The conventional
implicit scale of visible size is a primitive fe ure of perception.
light of this conception, is a by-product
of the constant scale of the visual world
at different distances. Scale, not size, is
actually what remains constant in perception.
background is a function of the same stimulus variables which yield the continuous
function, it is true, but equally dependent
on stimulation. The size of any particular
object is given by the scale of the back-
Enough is known, however, to suggest that
they permeate all forms of perception and that
the traditional emphasis on perceived objects
has too long diverted psychologists from concerning themselves with perceptual scales. A
program of experiments on various perceptual
scales (area, length, angular size, numerousness, and so on) is currently being conducted
under the direction of Dr. John Volkmann at
Mt. Holyoke College, but this research has
which ordinarily yields joint impressions
of both distance and scale. When he makes
called the perspective-illusion. All three
It is not an illusion at all but a demonstration that apparent size depends on ap-
parent distance.n illusion ma be defined as a_p
w`it me s retneats_af---th.emubrerr---gtving
clear enough for objects; it is when pictures come into csastherration......tharzur.
ITlinking about illusions is apt to become
Eon triser--- Insofar as this picture is a
habit is to see pictures thus) the increasing size of the cylinders' is not illusory.
Insofar as this picture is itself an object
(consisting of black lines on white paper)
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 73. Size as Determined by Distance
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
for objects. If this is true it would help to
explain why we find it so easy to conceive
stancy was the rule. The significant result,
be estimated without notable uncertainty.
less accuracy and with a tendency toward underestimation as compared with
dimensions of a solid object, but nevertheless with an approximate constancy of
size. The implication is that the distances between things tend to be visually
size and shape of interspaces with varying
distance and angle of regard is suggested
to the kind of theory being developed. Al-
seated at the end of a thoroughly cluttered
shelves, and furniture. Among these objects he had to estimate 20 specified dimensions, some being the dimensions of
in the open air between them. The distinction was not as clear as it sounds, for
behind any dimension. They varied between extremes of two and forty inches.
The subject made his estimates by pulling
rate as its retinal image, no one has ven-
that the length, width or height was always optically diminished by distance, and
tured to suppose that it does not diminish
at all. At some eventual distance the ob-
easier to suppose than that it does so by
way of becoming smaller? It has therefore
been assumed that size constancy necessarily breaks down at large distances, and
perceived size then tends to become perspective size. The implication is that in
outdoor space or aerial space, as contrasted with the room-sized spaces of the
of things necessarily tapers of toward the
horizon and the features of the terrain perforce look smaller than they are.
vided a test of this assumption, for sizeestimates were obtained out to a distance
approaching bare visibility of the object.
The situation is shown in Figure 74, which
represents several trials of the experiment
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 74. Judgment of Size-at-a-Distance
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
0 ,' '''''' ' 1 '1,'' ',SO'. ft's11,,;(i411.. Oil, '44',;, '',.."14t,q1';A '4F4',,,i'1,4' 'i,e,411',44q,,
,,PS4',, '4',4"14 ;;t 4 :'%, 4 ;,4'; IA '''' 1 ':'' t,"::t
1, L"''' ,'"! ,'',,' t'' ',e) ", '4"".l'Alvt'444."' 4.,...:'0
4 0 '44.tiLi,,,'N'1,4't4lell'I's4tIkief,:titi,'IVtriTt*:444,t ,Sq.,*
,,4',p,,,,0,7,1, '.44, 0,s, 4,,,i,,,,,,, ,A4,,., 4 ,,,,44.414'As ,,,j,,,,' ',,`,'1,4", r`V, l',/v,i4",.;!,R4Vt 11,04,4:;ie,,,144'sit s`,4,1,1Y frir,,$44;44,4.;sksi, `,41:1:','-t,,,,,,`
'4g '1'n'''''i, l'tI V"r14''S"'`," i '4'4 '''')4". ''';;;S:1'1":',";''''''s. :i'44',;"'
4441': ;''Pgirr,xet,F4',,,f,.,s4,t4;;:kr4re'tt`k.,140
i.,,4'%,*:,60,0,,,lort,p -40Sti,,ss44,40,'
:' 4 45,4,11444 aortt.4'''''th.#9.0.4'4,14 ,"4.-.,t,,,,,,, 44 64,4,1,1,,,,i, s,..'14'',' 4 ,:, 'r
FIGURE 74 (Contd.) The bottom photograph is the same scene as the one opposite
it except that the camera is higher, "looking down".
'.4i;',44to' '''''''''''' '''''''';;44'1;":.4;4'4; ' 4 '',V ;4°W 1,'`;,'; %,;;,,14 4 41'0,,tvi '41,14,4e,V;14;0141441;
,,,,04..y.., AOIAI),?"A'Al17" ;1V,",04 ''Y.0.;,:" 111,0',-,.,44,'4,'Ao.i.A4''oe'.%i''
', ,,414 4,,%3444 4% V;1,,,211;11,/a.1!1fr.:1' 1/,'11;,',,,,rill 140.,),t,ti,..,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
(36, p. 201 ff.). From the observer to the
California, and it was selected after much
exploration. Its texture was fairly even,
perspective. The procedure was as follows. A wooden stake, from fifteen to
ninety-nine inches in height, was planted
hid in a conveniently invisible irrigation
Our question as to whether sizes necessarily become smaller in perception before
answered in the negative. Under favorable
as it can be seen at all. Its size does not
constancy, for that was complete, but only
mated its height, either in scale-numbers,
of the increasing variability of the judgments with increasing distance.5
stake and at different distances, 150 judgments being obtained from each of fifteen
were then computed for the different sizes,
seventy-one inch stake at different distances, since they are typical. The cor-
consciously inferring an approximate size
for the distant stake. Inferences of this
With the exception of one observer who was a professional psychologist, no one became aware of these cues
subject perceived was merely a size-at-adistance.
yards) was 71.9 inches (S.D. 1.8) showing great accuracy. The mean estimate
when it was planted at 224 yards, a threeminute walk down the field, was 75.8
when it was planted at 784 yards, a tenminute walk and nearly to the end of the
Conclusion: The Objectivity of Experience
the objectivity of our experience is not a
paradox of philosophy but a fact of stimulation.
See (39) p. 210, for other details of the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
things are external, solid, stable, rigid,
the traditional interpretation of percep-
logy undermined it, but they did not overthrow the conviction that somehow we
not thing-like. The conception of sensory
organization implies a putting-together of
this theory, the data of sense still have to
be translated into an awareness of objects
and events. According to the present argument, however, the objective world does
not require for its explanation a process
of construction, translation, or even organization.
tal impressions obtained by introspection
are not colored bits of extensity but variables like contour, surface, slant, corner,
variables of a distribution of focused light.
These impressions do not require any putting together since the togetherness
that, philosophers and estheticians to the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
In Chapter 5 it was argued that the abstract space of points, lines, and planes
was a poor conception with which to begin the analysis of how we see, for no one
space-perception got off to a bad start by
point of view holds true for interspaces as
taking the space of geometry as the phenomenon to be explained. We chose to study
the visual world instead. Now that we have
a theory of the concrete phenomenal world,
however, do we also have any insight into
firmament above and the earth beneath. If
well as objects, it is possible to imagine
that something like matter or an ether is
this scalar quality seems to extend as far
All these features of visual perception can
we find the postulates of geometry satis-
fying and why is empty space so convenient
objects and only their ghosts in the form
of points, lines, and planes are imagined,
with surfaces and edges instead of geometrical forms. Triangles, squares, and
the postulate that two straight lines in the
far they are extended, remain equidistant.
This is a form of Euclid's famous parallel
postulate, which is one of the characterizing features of "self-evident" geometry.
things also find expression in the abstract
idea that a geometrical form can be shifted
and can be perceived. How they are perceived is a puzzle. What is the status of
and shapes of things in spite of variations
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
of congruence and the identity of dimensions and angles in Euclidean geometry.
Empty space is rigid, as are solid objects.
however, was somewhat shaken when, centuries after Euclid, geometers began to
non-Euclidean geometries, correspondingly, developed later in the history of
mathematics and are harder to understand.
The space of Euclid, the Cartesian coordinates,
ground, upright posture, and forward loco-
vanishing point, and this suggests that a
location called infinity is thinkable. What
are the consequences if parallel lines are
space is perfectly adequate for terrestrial measurements and the analysis of
Objects change shape in the visual field as
this imply? These were not, of course, the
literal questions which the non-Euclidean
geometers asked themselves, but the connection between the study of vision and the
new geometries is too suggestive to be accidental. In recent times these geometries
have flowered and, in their applications to
physics and astronomy, have been popularized. Everyone has heard of curved space
and nearly everyone is puzzled by it. Why
If geometry is an abstraction from experience, then Euclidean geometry is an
visual world whereas non-Euclidean geometry is an abstraction from, or is at least
suggested by, our experience of the visual
These abstract to three dimensions, and to a rigid space with absolute
terrestrial events, just as the visual world
is adequate for locomotion and our dealings
with ordinary objects. If it is not adequate
involving the speed of light, as the theory
of relativity suggests, it is at least the
Whether the space of the physical universe as a whole is or is not Euclidean is
a problem for physicists and astronomers.
on the basis of a mathematical analysis of
The first difficulty with it is that it fails
space is not Euclid's space may be intelligible but to say that the visual world
does not follow Euclid's postulates violates common sense. A more important
difficulty, however, is that it rests on a
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
its geometry is based on perspective. The
visual world, however, is an experience of
presumably based on the practical biological necessity of estimating the dimensions and judging the shapes of the eneveryday seeing.
vironment we live in, for only if things keep
and sizes of things seems to be a corollary of the perception of a visual world
and the quality of visual scale. Underlying this visual world is always the
primary surface of the ground. We can now
does. The expansion is a stimulus correlate for the sense of moving forward. An
recedes, for the contraction is a stimulus
slant ,since the compression is a correlate
it always seemed obvious, ought to produce a change in the size and shape of the
and shape of physical objects are not rethe retinal image although
assumption has been that an outline on the
retina yields an outline in perception and
space is the hyperbolic type of non-Euclidean
geometrical space it only confuses me. The
obstruse and theoretically unclear set of facts
which it seems to account for (the alley experiments) are not obtained in a situation with full
illumination and optimal conditions for depth
perception. The argument is based entirely on
an analysis of binocular disparity of images,
leaving out of consideration the geometry of
perspective as it applies to size, texture,
motion, and other types of stimulation. Perceptual space as we get it under optimal conditions with constancy of size and shape
so plainly and simply the space from which
Euclid abstracted his geometry, and this con-
ception is so illuminating for all the constancy
experiments which yield 100 per cent con-
stancy, that to deny it for the sake of the alley
experiments seems unjustified. The application
of mathematics to space" perception is a fertile
field, but the conclusions will be no better
than the assumptions with which the mathematician starts.
paper, for which it holds true that a modi-
When the retinal deformations of outline do
not have the expected effect in perception,
error lies in making the original assumption. Conceivably, a deformation need not
But if that is true, what enables us to have
Form, as we rerer to it here, means projected form
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
trasted with a shape in depth. This abstract geometrical form is not, we have
argued, a primitive spatial impression at
all. The primitive impression is a formin-depth, and its two aspects of projected
are concerned with is a conceptual experience represented by outlines on paper.
history of our efforts to understand perception, one might venture, is the tendency to
The form-on-a-plane, the geometrical form,
nothing but the shadows of things, that is
to say, their projections. Although Gestalt theorists have recognized that depth
extensity, their central problem and guiding concept was the shadowy form, not the
substantial one. Might it not be that the
dynamics of projected forms, so diligently
studied, consists not in the laws of form
points toward a conception of visual projected form which is very different from
all of which can vary continuously along a
about forms as a set of geometrical entities and concentrate instead on the
learned to do for colors, our thinking about
the visual process may be clarified. This
endeavor will be made in the remainder of
the present chapter, but first, we may ask,
How can there be more or less triangularity in a triangle, we ask? A form, according to the emphasis of Gestalt psychology,
itself and nothing else" (67, p. 175). As
triangular quality of a triangle cannot be
the ways in which we see and discriminate
forms. It suggests that form is unanalysable. If every form carries its own law
there can be no laws common to all forms.
is of no value whatever, once the principle
form not as a thing but as merely one of the
such as the slant of its surfaces, its size,
its color, its texture, and its distance,
discovered, however, have been principles
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
and good continuation (119). The criticism can be made that they are intended
to explain only why the perceived form is
they are not relevant to the main question:
Why is the perceived form specifically related to the retinal form? Only if there is
a specific relation is the perception good
related to the outside world. This relation cannot, it is true, be one of simple
specific. The Gestalt theorists, however,
copy of the retinal image, assumed that it
could not be wholly specific to the retinal
image (like other theorists before them) and
recognize) a visual pattern from memory or
information whatever about why the subject's response is like the original pattern.
That is a problem of psychophysical correspondence, analogous to why a certain
wave length looks red. What these experiments do yield information about is
between similar patterns and how we learn
discriminations are of the greatest importance but they must be founded on unhow
learned discriminations, and it is the latter with which we are now concerned.
A Psychophysical Approach to Form-Perception
by a theory of dynamical processes in the
ow do we judge the shapes and estimate the dimensions of the environment
we live in? This is the question too often
These principles of physiological selfarrangement gave a simple explanation for
errors in form perception. In some respects
better explanation of the errors than a distorting effect of well-remembered or frequently experienced forms, but in other
experience in form perception (121, Chapter
4). Neither a dynamical brain process nor
in which a subject is required to draw (or
forgotten in discussing the perception of
animal like man, the very essence of environmental shapes and dimensions is that
retina. If these locomotor transformations
all yield perceptions of the same objects
why could not other transformations yield
visual forms ?rtain regular transformations (expansion, contraction, a one-way
compression, a certain kind of skew, and a
an interpretive brain process, however, is
with a perception of the same shape. They
and parallax. Certain other transformations, not experienced as continuous during
locomotion, go with the perception of different shapes.` They are not confined to
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the geometry of perspective and parallax.
differ only gradually and continuously from
classes or categories except the so-called
all in the same transformation-group (25,
transformed into any other closed form by
a perfectly gradual or continuous change.
the fact that modern geometry can specify
that the exploration ought to be possible.
"The concepts of modern geometry," according to Cassirer (21, page 8), "derive
their precision and true universality only
changes with such a continuous transforma-
from the fact that the intuited particular
and rigid, but rather as a kind of plastic
Figure 75 is a chart of a few very simple
dimensions of variation. It illustrates the
the manifold of all rectangular figures. The
material capable of being moulded into the
forms is the crux of the difficulty. This
manifold has usually been reduced to order
only by classification, beginning with triangles, squares, circles, and the like. The
result is a set of groups or mutually exclusive categories analogous to the classes of
Aristotelian logic. The Greeks, and especially Plato, thought of geometrical forms
sisted. Classification is not, however, the
only or the best way of ordering a manifold. Serializing is more apt to bring out
(75). If we are ever to understand exactly
what yields a perception of shape we must
tion is what needs investigation. The normal or standard shapes familiar to every-
variation. They are norms or standards of
reference for shape, not entities of shape.
square lies at the center of the chart, but
there is no unique square, for the equalsided shape varies in size along the diaThe discriminable qualities of
'shape are very evident but they are not so
ness to thickness and tallness to shortness are perhaps the most obvious terms to
apply. The dimension of variation running
from upper left to lower right is a quality
either transformations of the same object,
environment, or transitions between different objects, which we perceive as
qualities of outline-shape. The dimension
from lower left to upper right is a change
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 75. The Transformations of Rectangular Shapes
These transformations are based on parallel projection rather than on polar (or perspective) projection.
object. Whether it is seen as a change in
distance (with size constant) or a change
in the size of objects (with distance constant) is indeterminate; only with a normal
environment does one or the other alternative become realized.
This suggestion, like much of the chapter,
is vague and speculative. As this book goes to
press the writer has begun a set of experiments
based on the hypothesis that a flat outline
as psychologists have done for the variations of color, sound, and the whole
gamut of the qualities and intensities of
uncover the nature of the specific relation
between the stimulus and the impression of
shape on paper never yields a determinate perception; it only yields a presumption of a real
shape. Perhaps shape cannot be studied intelligibly apart from the slant of its surface.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 76. The Qualities of a Simple Line
(38) that a visual line or border has two
direction and curvature of a short visual
line has one not specified the entire ex-
variable qualities, besides length. One is
left slant...zero slant...right slant, and the
properties and behaves in perception as if
it had them. The two dimensions of varia-
could be isolated and the qualities could
cal variables to which they correspond are
exact; the stimulus variables are the first
differential and the second differential of a
curve in analytical geometry. The first and
second differential are sometimes explained
which the slope is changing. Mathematically, these two variables determine a
curve at all its points. Phenomenally, the
visual line or border in all its (conveniently chosen) segments. If one specifies the
that tilt and curvature changed in the same
way as do sensory qualities like whitegray-black or warm-neutral-cold during and
was stared at, the tilt (or curvature) tended
toward neutral, and thereafter an upright
(or a straight) line looked tilted (or curved)
the other way. In short, the familiar after-
images of color were paralleled by afterimages of tilt and curvature, slight, but
after-image of color could be understood as
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
a shift in the psychophysical correspondence, and so could the after-image of tilt
If curvature and direction are the variable
qualities of a border, there is a possibility
and (2) the similarity of the elements to
variables of a rectangular figure have already been illustrated. The changes of
enormously complex. They seem to be integrated or organized to yield qualities of a
be a variable quality. It goes with "thing-
organization which is difficult to analyze.
When a line becomes a contour, the varia -'
tions of shape appear to jump to a higher
that shape cannot be reduced to its variations and that a form is unanalyzable.
The theory of visual form which this approach suggests is rather different from
latter is based on the celebrated laws of
tend to occur depend on (1) the proximity
one another, on the tendency of lines (3) to
make outlines (closure), and on the tendency of outlines (4) to be smooth (good con-
(good shape). These factors were interpreted as laws governing the appearance in
lines have to be unified for a figure to apThe factors could
een criticised on the grounds that they do
Koffica acknowledged the determining role
of the retinal image only in the postulate
set limits on the internal forces of organization (67, p. 138). In addition to this
points and lines which Wertheimer devised
often generalized as the laws of all per- /contour need to be understood before the
---------ception. These principles were based on
images of point-groupings and drawn outdrawings, chiefly of points, lines, and
curves, in different arrangements or rewere nonsense patterns of the extreme
therefore, to some kinds of abstract drawcurvature, orientation, and modes of intersection. The fact is that the points and
lines look like groups-or suggest complete
outlines in these artificial arrangements.
not so much to ordinary visual stimulation.
theimer (119), expanded by Koffka (67), and
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
tion of Spatial Perceptions by Meanings . ... The
Literal Visual World and the Schematic Visual
he discriminated the various distances of
lie was no longer living in trees and, al-
object to which he must have been sensitive was a sabre-toothed tiger or some
beast of equal ferocity. His conduct must
though we know little about him, he would
probably be classified as a member of the
have been rather nicely adjusted to distance when he encountered one in open
like ours and, if this is true, so were his
and were the immediate cause of his seelie was probably
a sharp-eyed creature for, as we know, he
varied in a precise way. To the tiger at a
he probably had little or no language, he
behavior was graded in relation to a variation of his retinal images.
the contour, shape, size, color, and motion
with tigers for, we may conjecture, he pur-
had no names for things and we shall never
know what his ideas or his conscious experiences were. But we do know this. He
discriminated among the variations of his
differentially to the objects of his environment.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
sued the one and fled from the other. The
differences in visual stimulation went with
named but he could react appropriately to
such light-reflecting objects, and they must
have aroused at least a primitive kind of
their meaning that he needed to discriminate them. The color, shape, motion, and
distance of things were of no interest to
were merely the identifying features, often
slight and subtle, of objects which invited or compelled action.
primitive man discriminated the solidity,
great accuracy. In his place, we would say
behaved toward things with circumspection,
for he saw a world of meanings.. Specula-
reasonably certain that our primitive ancestor got about in his environment, and
knew one object from another. His behavior was based on locomotion and recognition: it was adjusted to space, and
at the same time it consisted of reactions
localized and meaningful in his experience
since he reacted to both its distance and
its significance. Heretofore we have been
mainly concerned with the question how he
could localize the tiger. In this chapter
we must turn our attention to the question
and modelled in depth; as upright, motionless as a whole, and unbounded; as colored, textured, shadowed, and illuminated;
as filled with surfaces, edges, shapes, and
out the fact that the surfaces are familiar
our primitive ancestor, we apprehend their
uses and dangers, their satisfying or annoying possibilities, and the consequences of
shapes are in actuality perceived as ice,
apples, fur, fences, clouds, shoes, people,
and so on. Furthermore, our world is enlarged and complicated as compared with
that of our ancestor, by the inclusion of
certain forms, lines, and man-made patterns which we know as pictures, symbols,
short, is meaningful as well as concrete:
subject. One difficulty is that there are
example, there is first of all the possibility of a sort of primitive concrete mean-
ing which either results from the infant's
active exploration of his physical environment or is evidenced by such action. He
fingers and manipulates things, and later
for moveable objects, and pulls and pushes
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the way things look as if they were capable
Second, there are all the simple use-mean-
meanings stands at a far extreme from the
world of surfaces, edges, and shapes with
needs such as are embodied in foodobjects, play-objects, tool-objects, dangerous objects, and what Freud called
love-objects, the parents being the first
instances of the latter. For example, food
only sitting, standing, walking, and grasping. Nevertheless, they are both the same
fire looks hot . Third, there are the meanings of instruments, devices, constructions,
and machines. Fourth, there are the values
or emotional meanings of things which make
the shapes of the world attractive or repulsive in a vast variety of ways. Fifth,
there is the kind of meaning exemplified in
man must find a place to sit before he can
The kinds of meaning listed are not exhaustive. There are also the unspoken
meanings which go with visual motion such
as the expansion, deformation, and transposition described in Chapter 7, and these
need special consideration. There are the
above. Sixth, there is the particularly human kind of meaning embodied in symbols.
surface touches another, or collides with
action in another. There is also the whole
range of social meanings, facial expressions, gestures, persons and actions between persons (92, 52). The visual world
and it seems to get fuller with meaning as
The red light means stop. Significance may also be defined broadly, if one
principal advantage is that they can also
stand for classes, variations, and properties of these things. Carriers of symbolic
people who interact with one another; they
reasoning, creative imagination, invention,
is fully achieved only by means of learning.
The unsettled question is, how much of it
can be achieved without learning? Are the
learned meaning for every perception? The
Locke asserted in 1690 that all knowledge
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
of the world is learned, the mind at birth
question, of course, is how much behavior
do not learn their sensations of color but
learn their perceptions of everything else,
simplest theory to fit all that has gone be-
world is an unlearned experience, that it is
meaningless when seen for the first time,
with a good part of the evidence. It is at
least an improvement over the sensationperception theory, and as an approximate
or working hypothesis it is worth adopting.
But, as will be evident, it makes a number
of simplifications which are at best imperfect.
be valid for all the studies that have been
made of instincts, habits, and capacities
in men and animals, namely that no activity is ever either wholly learned or wholly
sumption that the constituents of the visual
The second oversimplification is the assumption that the meaning of
is that all meaning is learned that there
is that when meaning is added to things it
does not substantially modify their concrete
shape, motion, and all the rest remaining
gone over if we are to judge the adequacy
The introspective observations of Chapter 3 suggested that the characteristics of
the visual world could be described without reference to the practical meanings of
very possibly the practical meanings which
even when viewed with the purest attitude
be wholly meaningless if painters are to be
believed. Colors, they say, have their own
meanings, whatever the doctrine of sensation claimed, and an array of colors has a
who are thoroughly convinced that an array
which does not yield familiar objects on a
of this sort are not projections of existing
are therefore non-representative. Abstract
or non-objective paintings do not have use-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
as they have been differentiated from one
(as defined); but it is profitless to deny
another; memorizing depends on the formation of a unique or identifying response to
that they have any meaning, for the argument reduces to a conventional definition
systematic analysis and the whole subject,
colors and shapes which do not produce in
'thing to the formation of a meaning for each
item (33, 34). The experiments on drawing
the same direction: a senseless form must
gain sense in order to be recalled. Research on learning to recognize aircraft
when a nonsense form becomes identifiable
it also becomes meaningful. The common(39, Chapter 7) strongly
not strictly in accordance with the facts.
Non-objective forms lack namable or social-
ly agreed-upon meaning, but it is not true
which the onlooker knows what to do about
psychologist, meaning originates in adaptive response. Drawings not resembling
forms and, along with nonsense syllables,
color, texture, surfaces, shapes, and interspaces is ordinarily caused by a physical
environment, and constitutes what we have
are employed in experiments on memorizing.
meaning of a terrain or a floor, since. human
animals live as they do. On rare occasions,
image, for example a very brief exposure,
in experiments on the accuracy of perception. Nonsense forms are much more difficult to reproduce or discriminate than
look under the sea through diver's helmets, they stare at flames and clouds, and
they sometimes gaze at abstract paintings.
No terrain or floor is induced in these perceptions. Here, the modelling, color, tex-
is, however, that the results of these ex-
ture, and the rest of the variables of the
periments suggest that nonsense forms are
visual world do not produce a visual world
which are peculiar to the individual observer are always repolted and are, in fact,
to E. Gibson, nonsense syllables or non.sense forins can be memorized only insofar
paintings, for instance. The surfaces and
shapes induced by them do not, of course,
correspond to any physically existing surfaces and shapes. The personal meanings
they arouse could never be verified, and,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
consequently, they are not practical. The
surfaces and shapes seen by the diver and
the biologist, in contrast, are real, but the
The world in the microscope is novel; the
space of the cloud-patterns is useless; the
things in the painting are imaginary; but
variables which enable us to get around in
the environment we inhabit. A contemporary artist and teacher, Kepes, has
streetcar at one's back, depending on the
vision," referring to the painter's use of
expectations, in more recent, terminology,
and the perceptions thereby acquire significance.
added to a purely visual perception by ex-
tion (63). They have meaning, and the experimental combination of them creates
that they enable the painter to represent
why fur looks soft, ice looks cold, and a
represent high and hidden truth, however,
should not force us to the opposite extreme of declaring that surfaces, edges,
and shapes with color are without meaning,
least the meaning of surfaces, edges, and
box-like. Manipulative meanings are often
life. The change can then be noticed introspectively as, for instance, in the case
of a new kind of hand-operated tool encountered for the first time. After its use
is understood the object looks different.
the properties are not directly aroused by
present retinal stimulation. The association theory ascribed them to memory-images
impressions can be largely but not wholly
meaningless. If spatial meanings are inseparable from visual objects, the first
generalization of the formula being tested
are to some extent unlearned. Conceivably,
then, only the learned meanings are sepa-
get attached to the visual objects. What is
clustering around the visual shape, and the
latter is said to redintegrate one's past experience with the object. It is only logical
to suppose that the coldness of a piece of
pliers is not given by stimulation and must
are not like the memory images of recollection.
to be located in the object, not in the hand,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
observer usually has a feeling that he could
my students that this recession of meaning can be noticed with prolonged attention
to objects other than words. If you stare
at a paper match long enough, its familiarity disappears, although it does not break
soaked up such qualities and to be fairly
saturated with them, the use of the object
distinguishable to introspection and they
letters and words are merely shapes to the
illiterate, to foreigners, and to the very
patterns of words were also meaningless in
the beginning.) To most of us, on the contrary, the words we read are merely mean-
same thing happens when a piece of sandpaper is rubbed monotonously with the
fingers. Perhaps any scene begins to appear strange when the eyes are fixated long
visual field leads in this direction as does,
shapes. If the reader will stare fixedly at
There is a third kind of evidence for the
separability of meaning and spatial impressions
this is derived from studying the perceptions of Patients with brain injuries. With
tice almost immediately that it begins to
longer when fixated, but after an interval
injury to the occipital lobe of one of the
hemispheres there often results a peculiar
the meaning becomes separated of somewhere, and the word disintegrates into
e - vil or e- VI-1. Eventually even the letters may begin to look unfamiliar and the
If you repeat the word to yourself rapidly,
the pronunciation may tend to disintegrate.
retinal surfaces are projected by neurones
on the surfaces of the brain in such a way
lapse of meaning (7, 27, 96), but it is bet-
right of his line of sight, as is proved by
ter to say that the meaning recedes from the
word, since it frequently comes back spon-
that the right half of the visual field (the
left half of each retina) is represented on
Damage to the nerve-cells in this area pro-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
visual field has been constricted to half of
ordinary tests, see things fairly well, but
print has become wholly or partly meaningless. The letters are visible enough, but
they are no longer words. In one test, for
instance, he may be able to take a set of
each block to make the letter right side up
without being able to name a single letter
or arrange the blocks in alphabetical order,
such a patient may be able to trace letters
with his fingers without knowing what they
A significant fact, incidentally, is that his
visual world is not halved how could it be?
The patient usually complains only that he
cannot see things as definitely as he used to.
The visual world is not a point-to-point projection of the retinas. The world can still
be integrated out of successive fixations of
perception fills in the blind area. The point
is, however, that a localized area of injury
in the visual brain produces a localized area
disappearance of objects in a localized area
world but it does not map the world we see.
The brain and the retina are in spatial correspondence with one another, whereas the
brain and the phenomenal world can only be in
correspondence other than one of simple pointto-point projection. This means that one can-
not expect to find any simple localization in
the brain of what is ordinarily called space
perception. Consequently it is only natural,
not paradoxical as neurologists assume (8),
that a localized brain lesion should cause the
loss of a piece of the field of view (a blind
feature of the perception of the world (for
example, distorted size or defective meaning).
mean. The forms as such are discriminable
psychic blindness or visual agnosia. This
is a failure to recognize or know the names
of objects, persons, pictures, and places.
are relatively undisturbed, but that their meaning is reduced. Verbal and conceptual meanings
the more it approaches high order concepts.
At least this seems to be true as meaning
which things have for them is a truism. Men
of different training, interests, and convic-
anatomist differently from the way in which
it is by the rest of us. A nickel is not the
same thing to an adult as it is to a child.
An industrial machine is not the same thing
to its operator as it is to the plant owner.
The specialized perceptions of the connoisseur, the photographer, the doctor, the
woodsman, and the engineer are all different. Moreover the apprehension of the environment
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
strange ways of behaving, such as used to
be described, but also in strange ways of
perceiving and apprehending things. Accounts by anthropologists of these foreign
Trobrianders, it has been reported, recognize that a child resembles its father
resemblance is proper and to be expected;
the latter is inadmissible. The perceptions of similarity are part and parcel of a
set of customs regarding kinship. Klineberg suggests that the effect is a failure
actual interference with the sensory perception (65), but this is hard to be certain
the meaning of the world for himself, within the framework of his upbringing and the
society in which he lives. Significance and
background and partly by the individual's
has been called empiricism. It is consistent with the emphasis on learning and
education and with the scientific approach
to human nature and culture in the history
all meanings are learned implies that human
beings are plahtic rather than cast in rigid
that exceptions to it should be carefully
psychology at the beginning of this century he included in his definition of an instinct "an innate disposition to perceive
and pay attention to objects of a certain
intrinsically fearful objects, intrinsically
objects, objects which ininvited acquisition, mating,
curiosity, self-assertion, and all the rest
of the list. The emotional excitement, the
impulse to action, and the purposive striving of an instinct were all contingent upon
theory led to absurdities in social psychology and encouraged a tendency to name
various aspects of human behavior instead
growing science of human learning. Stimuli, reflexes, and chained reflexes were
more exact terms with which the experimenter could work. But the neutral term
behavior is a function of objects, and the
theory of patterned stimulation or Gestalten
arose to reintroduce the notion of intrinsic
surely wrong about intrinsically fearful or
eatable objects in perception, but perhaps
evidence for innately meaningful perceptions. Lashley has stated the case convincingly in the following way (71). If
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
you put the question, "What is an egg to a
nesting bird?" a perfectly sensible answer
field when they first smile while looking at
a doting adult, it would suggest an innate
clean its surface, and to sit on it." Such
an instinctive response nicely adapted to
induce or maintain the doting attitude of
as an egg, or we might say, has the meaning of an egg. The experimental fact is
definite limits of roundedness and certain
limits of size, and with a texture approaching a specific sort. Objects with these
qualities are eggs; objects without them,
when put in the nest, are not eggs in the
sense that they are pushed out of the nest.
first nesting season without opportunity to
between eggs and non-eggs but gross discriminations are. Lashley points out that
discriminative behavior of this sort is as
frequent as are instincts, for the two go
can eventually make very fine discriminaamong birds' eggs for example
and these are learned. In the use of language he has acquired a special method for
learning and retaining fine discriminations.
differentiated adult meanings is it possible
babies identify a human face in the visual
to a pattern similar to a face; and that it
bottle, a lampshade, or a square of cardboard. It is not asserted here that babies
instinctively recognize their mothers; it
would be enough to show that they have an
unlearned response which would make their
Just this seems to have been demonstrated recently by Spitz and Wolfe (99).
they report, almost universally fixate and
smile at any face-like object if it moves.
or a crude mask, or a dummy, as illustrated in Figure 78. A vicious leer is as
facial expressions. It must be the pattern
of a full face; a profile will not do. Too
small a face will not do, such as that of a
not do, nor will a milk bottle, or a toy, or
smiled at. After 6 months the baby's smile
recognizes his parents; he reacts to an expression of disapproval; he begins to smile
be learned. But the original smile is apparently not. The effective stimulus for
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
FIGURE 78. Patterns which Evoke the Infant's Smile
it is an indeterminate pattern with only the
elementary characteristics of a human face.
The wordless meaning of this crude pattern is equally primitive, but it neverthe-
ception of space is unlearned, meaningless,
less is a discriminable pattern and it has
the meaning of something-to-be-smiled-at.
mains just what it was before. Fhe texture, slant, color, contour, and other con-
learn meanings at a zero level. They show
the falsity of the notion that we are born
set of innate ideas, but at the same time
the same as before, to use the older ter-
they contradict the notion that all meaning
and acquires its meaning in the course of
fication which is far from perfect. It sup-
be apprehended differently but it is sense(
There are few generalizations in psycholb
this one. It can easily be disproved; wha
Consider first the evidence for its untruth
should be unaffected by the mere fact tha
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
certain conditions a piece of cloth in the
need of money and infrequent possession of
greener than an equivalent piece of cloth
reflected from both was only faintly greenish. There is an effect of what is called
memory-color, that is, the color associated
awe of a coin; that indeed they modify the
very spatial structure of 'the child's world,
the environment for a poor child are different from what they are for a rich child.
Economic class may affect even the sensations of things. It is worth noting, however,
that when Carter and Schooler repeated the
experiment (20) only remembered or imagined coins were exaggerated in size;
rich or poor, in close relationship to their
The outline of a thing ought not to suffer
alteration just because one knows what it
is good for, nor should a geometrical form
are modified by meaning, and the fact has
found that a piece of brown chocolate had
a stronger chocolate taste than a piece of
white chocolate when the taster could see
This result failed, however, if the subject
came to suspect the purpose of the exthem,
to be affected by its meaning. Bruner and
Goodman, however, found that ten-yearolds perceived coins as larger than equi-
striking tendency for poor children to see
This latter result is the dramatic feature
FIGURE 79. The Effect of Meaning on Visual Form
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
torso, by another as a dumbbell, and by a
third as a violin (35). The drawings of the
interests in life. It should be noted that
The same kind of result has been obtained by many experimenters (121, Chapter 4).
The errors made by observers in reproduc-
ing visual forms constitute a fascinating
ideas), perhaps the most comprehensive is
that of Bartlett, who suggests that a pattern tends to be schematized during perceiving and remembering (5). Bartlett himself had investigated story-telling from
memory as well as form-perception, and he
things, of valued things, of attractive or
repulsive things, and of customary things
or things that other people also see. Perception, in Bartlett's term, tends to be
The study of this tendency in percepis valuable, for it illuminates a set of
problems of the very greatest importance.
tions of race, nation, religion, and class?
with respect to physical qualities as well
as being simplified with respect to meaning.
rather than as persons? Why do rumors and
The Literal Visual World and the Schematic
discovered, as had earlier students of the
psychology of testimony, that a story gets
the evidence for a schematic trend in perception. Itis tempting to conclude that
cordance with a schema which is characteristic of the individual, his interests, and
things not as they are but as we are. Any
shall call in this book literal perception.
questionably be affected by the past experience and attitudes of the observer.
William James once remarked that perception was of probable things. The experiments suggest that perception is also
of familiar things, of expected things, of
known, typical, average, or normal things,
of namable things, of specific or precise
by either of two general methods. The first
is the psychophysical method of the labora-
tory in which it is expected that the subject will make the best observations of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
to color, size, shape, and sequence than is
necessary, since literal perception takes
time and effort. The percept is reduced to
equivocal stimulation in which the experimenter arranges conditions so that errors
dim light, or a flash exposure, or presents
more items than are perceptible at once, or
a cue for action. But perception can become literal whenever the observer needs
to discriminate. Under favorable conditions it can be surprisingly exact, as the
makes his test after an interval of time.
He may present undifferentiated or nonsense configurations, such as ink blots,
distorted by needs or affected by purposes
(18). It is not fated to be stereotyped or
presents reversible figures or patterns with
one meaning. This method yields schematic perception. Impoverished, ambiguous,
or equivocal stimulation is necessary because the observer in a psychological
experiment, if he is an adult, is usually
wary. He will look with attention and perceive literally when conditions permit.
schematic trend in perception has all been
obtained either by this method of presentation or with relaxed attention on the part of
conditions for observation had been differen t.
It is true, to be sure, that the perceiving
of everyday life is often a matter of glances
and the results of impoverished or ambiguous presentations are therefore truer
to life than the results of optimal presentations. The perception of everyday life is
way." In the course of practical behavior,
perception is no more literal with respect
experiments of the laboratory demonstrate.
perception is not a consequence of sensory
organization but of the inattention of the
stimulation. It is perfectly true that perception can be fluid, subjective, creative,
and inexact, but it can also be literal. It
can be literal with respect to fine differences and complex qualities, as the
wine-taster, the artist and the scientific
when he is in danger of assuming that men
types and perceptual customs. The detection of witches by the citizens of Salem,
Massachusetts, is a case of gross misperception, but it does not always happen.
this book is about might now be defined as
qualities as they appear to attentive observation. It is a world of color and space
in combination; it is not the world of color-
sensations, since that is a myth of seventeenth century psychology. It resembles
the world of everyday experience more than
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
the other hand, it is not simply the world
of everyday behavior either, since that is
space have dropped away. Only in an unfamiliar environment or a problem situation
sense the real study of perception begins
with it. Schematic perception, however, is
literal perception, and we cannot hope to
discuss it sensibly without coming first to
In the thinking of many artists, for example, there exists a confusion between
first problem before they can undertake to
logicians have been concerned for centuries over how to define true knowledge.
They need to know what part sensory sti2For
schematic perception and a consistent presen-
tation of the theory that perception depends
mainly on constructive processes within the
reader is referred to Vernon's Visual Perception (115). Vernon's entire emphasis is on
the degree to which percepts are not in correspondence
referable to physical objects outside the observer.
In the study of social psychology (and the
other social sciences which rest upon it),
there is an enthusiastic interest in perceptual customs, the social norms which
the values of a culture, the formula has it,
need to be reminded that all human beings,
the human species before they can hope to
classes, races, or nations. It is important
to understand that a poor child remembers
a fifty-cent piece- as much bigger than it
really is. But this fact can never be corn,
that two-dimensional color-sensations are
innate while all other perception depends
on learning, fails completely to meet the
that meaning is learned meets more of the
color, form, and texture. Symbolic meanings, however, seem to be detachable from
their objects and are presumably learned.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
do not have to be learned and consequently
that all kinds of meaning are not learned.
optimal, approach an exact correspondence
properties (color, size, outline) and that
relation may be shown to exist without our
these properties therefore depend upon the
personality and the culture of the perceiver.
schematic perception, not to literal percep-
tion. The properties of the literal visual
Conceivably every such relation is partly
innate and partly acquired. Even the relation of color to wave length may be refined
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Behavior Mediated by PercepIn What Sense Do We Learn to See?
behaviorists according to which side they
favored. Today that dispute does not seem
greater importance is an understanding of
the process of learning in animals and men.
A similar issue in a new form arises, how-
true that one learns to perceive? It might
theorists and others haves tended to locate
former emphasize that learning is an alteration of behavior, the latter that learning is
comprehension, cognition, expectation, or
is that behavior is what counts, and they
are content merely to specify the "stimuli"
argument of the latter is that the perceived
determines its behavior, and that learning
result of learning in quite another sense.
The first question asks what the relation is between perception and performance. The investigators of learning in
animals and children have tended to locate the learning process in the performance of their subjects. But the Gestalt
learned behavior mediated by perception or
is perception only an incidental accompaniment of learned behavior? In other words
it or is our seeing of the world the result
of our adjusting to it? Is learning a matter
learning? This issue is not merely a verbal dispute, for differing opinions yield
quite different experiments. Neither is it
of the field. Learning is conceived to be
the understanding of the values of things,
event. Learning is thought to be perceptual and spatial or, in Tolman's words, to
try to answer. The first is, in what sense
is learned behavior mediated by perception? The second is, in what sense is it
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
real issue between these theorists reduces
to whether it is enough to say that stimuli
evoke behavior or whether it is necessary
relation is between perception and learning. Granting that our perception of the
world is not simply constructed out of unlearned sensations plus images, in what
in the previous chapter proved inadequate,
the absence of agreement upon a definition
has been at the root of much fruitless discussion.1 In psychology the term is currently used in two different ways. It may
mean a variation of energy to which there
corresponds a variation of either an experience or a response, or it may mean the
occasion for an identifiable act. The first
in psychophysical experiments; the second
usage is employed in experiments on learn-
ing and behavior. There is a great difference between these two. The stimulus in
instance of a systematically varied set of
from a series of experimental variations of
their physical properties made by an experimenter. The stimulus in a learning
experiment is often taken to be simply an
object or event a junction of routes in a
maze, a bell, a flash of light, a black box,
or a printed word. Strictly speaking, these
usually called stimulus-objects or stimulus-situations.
Chapter 5 that these terms cloak our ignorance. Behavior is, of course, a specific function of objects and situations, but
we need to know why this is so. The stimulus-energies delivered to the receptors
representations of the objects and situations to which they correspond.
special process of inner learning was invented to account for the discrepancy between the stimulus-energies and the perceived objects. So was the more recent
theory of sensory organization propounded
behaviorist, therefore, maintains that he
need not concern himself with a rat's perceptions, when he denies that behavior is
assumes that his rat responds to the alley
The definition given in Chapter 5 is worth
repeating here: a type of variable physical
energy, falling within certain limiting thresholds, which excites a receptor-cell differentially; also the differential excitation of different
receptors with respect to the adjacent and
successive order of differences over the array
glossing over a difficulty and concealing a
stead, as Miller and Dollard have recently
done in explaining Hull's theory of learning (83), but this expedient begs the ques-
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
The situation is different if one assumes
that the stimulus. energies delivered to the
receptors are precise mathematical transformations of the objectsand situations to
inference and sensory organization become
gratuitous. Behavior is a specific function
of ordinal stimulation. The definition of
and the convenient notion that a plurality
of discharging receptor-cells represents a
plurality of stimuli must be wholly rejected.
process is mistaken if it implies that the
only way to be sure an animal has learned
is to intuit the animal's perception. It is
useful to suppose that a rat has insights
makes simple inferences, and that he remembers a map of a maze, but there is no
compulsion to suppose this. Sign-learning
may be described as the accrual of meaning
to a percept, and it may also be described
as an altered tendency to react to the stimulus-correlate of an object. Which formula is more revealing we do not yet know.
mental process. It is not something intermediate between stimulation and response. Both perception and behavior may
be activities of the organism specific to
the study of ordinal stimulation. The socalled stimulus-objects for behavior are
visual world. The so-called cue's for behavior are certain invariants of stimulation
which yield objects with color-constancy,
stimulation if they are to be specifically
responded to, but it does not follow that
they must necessarily be known if they are
discussed in Chapter 2, proved to be indecisive. The Gestalt theory of sensory
organization did not clarify the issue, for
its critics called it a kind of nativism, but
formula advanced in the preceding chapter
was inadequate, inasmuch as the perception of literal space is not wholly unlearned
and the perception of schematic meaning is
spontaneously and other respects in which
training. The difficulty is to state in what
The First Perceptions of Cataract Patients Blind from Birth. The method of
of all opportunity to exercise the function,
at the same time providing him with all the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
conditions of life and growth which might
enable the function to mature. The function of vision is much too valuable in the
human subject to allow such experimentation, but the circumstances required for
the experiment sometimes occur naturally.
both eyes at, or soon after, birth. In this
that the individual is, for all practical purSome diffused light can
no more than a vague gray fog, brighter at
possibly brighter in one region and darker
in another when facing strongly contrasting
surgically removed, and after this happens
the eye can form a differentiated image on
the retina (although glasses must be worn
The foremost fact is that the patients were
bewildered and confused by the new visual
impressions, especially by the continuous,
unrelenting flow of these experiences and
by their enormous variety. It must be remembered that, in common-sense terms,
to such an extent that finally he could no
longer see anything, the latest thing having not yet faded when the next impressed
had the use of language but they found it
question, "Are things projected in space?"
perfect, and although the reports were obscure and sometimes contradictory, the
require an extended period of development
now normal persons, and the task of learning to see sometimes overwhelmed them
with its difficulty. Some, discouraged and
depressed, quit trying to see. These unfortunates were treated by establishing for
first time by a projection of his environment. The question is, what does he see?
The evidence consists of what the patients said when they opened their eyes,
to a blind-born person is more the task of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Nevertheless there is evidence of spontaneous unlearned visual capacity in these
from the outset. The patients could follow a moving object with their eyes and
hand is guided by the visual images of the
to be an action of great apparent interest
faces was reported to be pleasurable, although the colors could not, of course, be
Most of the investigators had preconceived ideas of what the patients might
assumed that there were three alternatives:
the observer might see things at the eye,
that is, touching it, or he might see things
in a flat plane in front of the eye, or else
the eager questions about such perceptions the patient could not respond. He
might fall in with the unconscious coaching of the questioner.
that the patient saw none of these possibilities. There are indications that he
saw more nearly a visual world than a flat
no words for the features of his environment. The patient could not assign to his
moving or still, far or near. He could not
immediately say whether there were two or
three black spots on a piece of paper. He
could not even point on request to an edge
anything about his visual impressions. He
had these terms in his vocabulary but they
referred to tactual and muscular impressions only. Although this inability to
describe anything made it almost impossible to discover what the patient saw, his
behavior indicated that he did have visual
impressions and that some of them differed
the patient could use the words "same" or
"different" (94, p. 155-157). For example,
two strips of cardboard, 10 cm. and 20 cm.
long, were seen as different but the patient
could not say that one was "longer." That
word meant something quite different from
a large key appeared different as they lay
side by side on the table, but they could
not be identified or named. When they were
with other pairs of objects such as knives
visual field, but something less determinate
straight, square or round, thick or thin,
cardboard, key, or fork. He could react to
the difference, apparently, before he was
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
able either to specify the difference or to
The histories suggest that some comparative terms were applied to the visual
Colors were soon named; visual motion was
quickly called what it is; large and small
learning to use the innumerable terms for
comparing and naming visual shapes. Perhaps this is not surprising in view of the
subtlety and variety of those spatial fea-
therefore manifest a minimum of stimulusgeneralization. There is nothing to show
in any of the cases described that the two
modes of sensory impressions for the same
object were in the least connected at the
that the visual and the kinesthetic quality
of "vertical" are originally alike. A case
after the operation, to identify a horizontal and a vertical line drawn on a card.
tures by which we distinguish objects from
identify the objects, places, events, people,
and animals of the environment, and still
by this time to trace, that is, to correlate
son who sees for the first time literally
siderable part of his task is to name the
previously aroused by the old tactile and
paired-associates learning in the psychological laboratory when new cue-items are
substituted for old ones. Such experiments would imply that transfer of learning should occur (47). It should be noted,
however, that visual stimuli and tactile muscular stimuli are dissimilar and should
with his finger. Presumably he had learned
unlike manipulable objects, never had any
tactile-muscular counterparts, for instance,
similar to one another. An extreme example would be learning faces or, more
kind of learning all the operated patients
had extreme difficulty and made slow progress. There are analogous experiments
on identifying nonsense forms (34), learning
a code (62), and recognizing aircraft (39).
It could be predicted from these experiments, and from E. Gibson's theory based
on "intra-list generalization" (33), that
the more items there are to be identified,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
learning. It would also be predicted that
old items. All these phenomena are reported in the learning of the cataract
and perhaps this is no small part of seeing.
that is to say space were at first invisible
instead, that these variables were not at
first, or not completely, identifiable. The
impressions were, however, discriminable,
limited to this kind of identification. When
silhouette in the sky but not at an otherwise identical goose-like silhouette (107).
If Spitz is correct, human infants retain a
tendency to smile at face-like objects and
at these only (page 208). It would appear,
possibly not even by men. In the terminology of the previous chapter, there may be
embryonic meanings in the first visual impressions.
The question of whether or not spaceperception in animals is learned is a poor
practice will react appropriately to spatial
and Russell's study of the jumping behavior of rats reared in complete darkness
to maturity without seeing even the walls
a retinal image it is a visual identification.
into the light and placed on a high platform
with a gap between this and another platform containing food. The rat was first
identification, although an extremely im-
portant one for human learning. Our hypothetical pre-human ancestor who could
pursue zebras but fled from sabre-toothed
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
more at 40. Most of them failed at 40 cm.
or refused to jump, but the significant fact
is that they increased the force of their
force of the jump was recorded automatical-
successfully as normal rats reared in the
light (they fell more often) but the gradations of force were nearly as accurate.
The implication is that they could discriminate the distance nearly as well.
edge, which is the essential feature of a
gap in the floor. Not only were they reacting differentially
they were with some success identifying a
appropriate act. The identifying act seems
in darkness are being continued in Lashley's laboratory using chimpanzees, whose
perceptions are probably more like man's.
The first tests for visual perception indicated that these animals were blind (90),
or at least that they failed to use vision in
nature of identifying responses, including
is becoming clear, however, that the discriminating of stimulus-variables is an
identifying the cue for it. The object must
be reacted to as the same object on different days. Similar objects and events
are said to be equivalent for behavior unless the organism discriminates among
been conditioned is said to show generalization in that the response will occur to
differing in only one respect. The psychophysical experiment in its simplest form
elicits a discriminative judgment of "more"
or "less," but there is a basic similarity
daily life, however, do not come in neatly
the nature of cues and of learning a different kind of experiment is necessary. It
each of a whole set of objects or events,
differ in many dimensions of variation and
should fall into classes and sub-classes.
Since this passage was written, the writer
has been informed by Dr. A. Riesen that this
explanation is indeed the most probable one.
The visual defect seems to be due to abnormal
maturation, and it cannot be ascribed wholly to
Attention is centered on the errors of identification and how they are eliminated. As
a type it might be called the identification
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
fixate, and move the eyes, although it is
very possible that practice improves these
functions. We do not, in other words, learn
We do not learn to associate retinal points
so as to see form. We do not learn to interpret color and form sensations so as to
see the third dimension. What we do learn
preeminently is to identify the features of
visual stimulation which correspond to the
important features of the physical environment.
Words facilitate but are not essential to
it may prove to be in detail, it is sure to
variables discoverable in retinal images.
There must occur, in other words, a difference in response along with a difference
reaction or a discriminative judgment. The
for the identifying of things, grading into
one another as they do and innumerable as
we learn to notice the differences between
them, our perceptions of the world become
differentiated. Formerly indefinite qualities become definite. Shapes and textures
Indeterminate movements, locations, sizes,
Properties like inside and outside, congruency, symmetry, opposition, and continuity are elaborated. Objects, events,
The qualities of, or differences between,
process is started it builds upon itself;
more objects are identified. The traditional way of putting it is to say that things
learning is from indefinite to definite, not
learn to have percepts but to differentiate
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
be consistent with the observations of so
many people? Introspectively, it is a fact
Vision in 1709, it has appeared plausible
that the seeing of space depends, in some
fundamental way, on exploring and manipulating the environment. Seeing things,
Berkeley argued, could always be verified
by touching things, and hence it was pos-
acting. Spatial behavior is intimately connected with spatial perception. Things
muscular impressions which always accompany it. We learn to trust our vision
of the table as being there, for instance,
capable of being traced with the finger. A
slant looks as if you could angle the palm
of your hand to it, or climb it. Thus, the
visual world has the appearance of inviting many kinds of behavior.
his vision develops. Is it not likely that
his visual impressions get their solidity
quite another to maintain that it gets its
spatial qualities from these meanings. It
that we do not really see it but only remember how it feels. Perhaps what is
This theory has such great persuasiveness that it must embody a truth even if it
is its one-sidedness. The infant explores
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
things he feels. If visual impressions acquire motor meanings, is it not just as inevitable that motor impressions should
trouble with a motor theory of space perception is that it needs to be supplemented
with a visual theory of muscular impressions. For every seeing individual there
is a co-variati:_ of retinal stimulation and
muscular-tactile stimulation during behavior.
The term kinesthesis, meaning sensitivity to motion, is usually applied to the
sense in the lower part of his body. Dam-
joints and from the soles of the feet. He
cannot feel the position or motion of his
legs. He walks with a very peculiar gait,
as if he had to throw his legs forward, and
all, or even stand up. The thing to note,
after a fashion, if he looks at the ground
bodily sensitivity the use of the legs is
which yield impressions of both the motion
and position of our limbs. There are also
impossible unless visual sensitivity fulfills the necessary functions. It would
seem that there are two forms of the kinesthetic sense; one based on the known
receptors in the inner ear which yield im-
is not one of the senses; there are not just
types of receptors. It probably should be
function is to adjust and set the pace for
to depend on all these sources, but there
tabulation of the kinds of retinal motion
ments of external objects and of the body
is given on page 132. Thc point to be emphasized is that there are normally retinal
sort driven by gasoline engines, propellers, and jets, and in the case of the
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
advanced types of spatial behavior, visual
In as apparently simple an act as picking up a pencil both visual and muscular
impressions are involved in the control of
the performance. The contracting image of
coincides with the image of the pencil is
paralleled by the feeling of the hand being
extended and touching the pencil. This is
retinal motion and the muscular impression
act and this stimulation affects the action.
of electronics (120). In the case of spatial
each other when we introspect on our experience. Retinal motion is automatically
linked to bodily action from birth onward,
so long as the eyes are open and there is
light to see by. Bishop Berkeley was cor-
touch the table is to confirm visual space;
what he did not understand is that the expanding visual field also confirms muscular-
neither to see space before we can behave
can see. A man who gets about his environment without collisions and mani-
pulates objects to the satisfaction of his
added to the circle, so that the complete
process is like that diagrammed in Figure
The Coordination of Spatial Impressions and Spatial Behavior
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
also by acceleration of the head affecting
by changing contact of the skin with supporting surfaces and resisting surfaces.
however, is that perceiving the environment includes the .go as part of the total
visual field," i.e., the peripheral retinal
images of the nose and other parts of the
therefore an object in the field of experience like any other object (67, page
with which psychologists and philosophers
it is called, is necessary for any scientific
theory of personality, of social behavior,
of abnormal behavior, or of ethical behavior. A clarification of the social ego
(98) might be possible if a few solid facts
could be stablished about the biological ego, that is, the ego manifested in
bounding images. They shift in a specific
way when the eyes turn; they also shift in
shift is "concomitant and reciprocal" with
locomotion and manipulation, and in literal
rather than a single correlate. Tentatively, the following can be listed:
erally as sornaeithesia, the self-stimula-
the posture of the legs, trunk, head, and
8. Finally, several types of more or less
continuous organic stimulation known gen-
tion involved in breathing for instance, and
also in eating, drinking, and sexual activity, together with the stimulation underlying bodily discomfort or comfort.
stimulation which might yield a primitive
ego in perception. The notable thing about
them is that they all co-vary with action.
The process is circular. An overt performance is controlled by various types of
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
4.--$0',...A0 1 dr .::::: :4::iir: ... AC' 91/
-,,,,, , -,-. ........,"-.rt, '',4,00.740," / -,.. OW,
..,,...././,,,,,,- ,;.5. 0,'/././//,41.4Z4V,V
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
performance takes its origin, is controlled
The central hypothesis of this book asserts that space is constituted of the
surfaces and margins are what we see, not
this hypothesis the objection can be made
nearest object is plainly empty. The objection is convincing, but it can be overcome.
superposition or overlapping of surfaces;
depth-perception, not a cue for depthperception. The explanation was found
in steps, as contrasted with gradients, of
a, step in the density of texture, a step in
the rate of deformation of texture, and a
step in the binocular disparity of texture.
field, particularly the image of the nose,
steps in ordinal stimulation. The nose is
the tip to the nostril coincides with a foot
should, therefore, according to the present
degree of visual nearness (see page 106).
the nose and external reflecting surfaces,
the greatest possible velocity of parallactic motion is reached in the retinal image,
facts establish an absolute zero of distance in stimulation and this, in turn,
makes possible an absolute scale of distance in experience.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
SP ATI AL PERCEPTION AND SPATIAL BEHAVIOR
to "there" and that he, himself, is "here."
This impression is in correspondence with
retinal stimulation. The perception of the
both, figuratively speaking, cut from the
that a person projects his sensations out-
The study of locomotion is in its infancy. Although a good deal is known
ward from the eyes. All the ingenuity that
great first step of distance at the windows
of the eyes themselves are all to be found
forces of the physical environment. Plants
can orient to the direction of gravity and
the direction of light. Animals possessing
vision and locomotion react to finer variations and can orient themselves, not only
The human species has a still more differentiated environment and can orient to
which has been very thoroughly investigated
the behavior of white rats in running through mazes. But maze-learning
comes to be oriented to the goal-box of a
maze is a disputed issue, as the last chapter indicated (58, 109).
to be defined? What would be a fundamenHow,
using locomotion as an analogy for higher
forms of behavior that they never got down
to studying the literal process. The simplest kind to study would probably be the
act of going to a visible object or place,
stimulation which yields the perception of
a visual world with the goal - object in it.
necessity of avoiding obstacles, or direct-
"here" to having a sense of self, and so important is the visual image of the nose to the
impression of being "here," that nose-perception must be a prominent factor in the
Cyrano and Durante, and they have clearly
understood the relation between a man and
his nose, but the subject deserves more investigation.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
would be the act of going to an object or
is going and where he is now. It requires,
The individual must perceive the space which surrounds him on
all sides, as described in Chapter 3, and
visible scene the layout of the building,
of the city and its streets, of the region,
cities. He is then said to be oriented in
independent of the standpoint of any observer, rests upon this type of orientation.
view, depends on being oriented in space.
Orientation is inseparable from locomotion,
for, only because an observer gets a different visual field at every different standpoint, does he perceive a single integrated
diverse fields yielding a visual world independent of any standpoint. The facts
of spatial perception and of spatial behavior are united in the fact of the visual
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Stimulus-P atterns in Commonplace Environments," Amer. J. Psychol., 59, pp.
"Studies in Space-orientation. I Perception of the Upright With Displaced Visual
Fields," J. Exper. Psychol., 38,pp. 325-337.
Boring, E.G. (1933), The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness. New York: Century.
"Studies in Space Orientation. II Perception of the Upright with Displaced Visual
Boring, E.G. (1935), t1The Relation of the
Attributes of Sensation to the Dimensions
of the Stimulus," Philos. Sci., 2, pp. 236245.
Boring, E.G. (1942), Sensation and Perception in the History of Experimental Psychology. New York: Appleton-Century.
"Studies in Space Orientation. III Perception of the Upright in the Absence of a
Study in Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Perception: Size-Constancy in a Representative Sample of Situations," Psychol.
Buhler, K. (1922), Handbuch der Psychologie. i Teil. Die Struktur der Wahrnehmun-
'tOn Lapse of Verbal Meaning With Repetition," Amer. J. Pschol., 30, pp. 415-418.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Buswell, G.T. (1935), I/ow People Look at
Cantril, H. (1948), 'The Nature of Social
Perception," Trans. \'.Y. Acad. ScI., lo,
"Value, Need, and Other Factors in Perception," Psychol. Rev., S6, pp. 200-207.
Child, C.M. (1941), Patterns and Problems of Development. Chicago: Univ.
the Evolution of the Human Eye. Philadeiphia: Lea and Febiger.
Gibson, E.J. (1949), 'A Systematic Application of the Concepts of Generalization and Differentiation to Verbal Learning," Psychol. Rev., 47, pp. 196-229.
tIntra-List Generalization As A Factor in Verbal Learning,"
Gibson, J.J. (1933), tAdaptation, Aftereffect, and Contrast in the Perception of
Curved Lines, ' ' J . E xper. P sychol. ,
Gibson, J.J. (1937), "Adaptation, Aftereffect, and Contrast in the Perception of
Science," 4mer. Scientist, 35, pp. 33-55.
Movement," 4mer. J. Physiol., 8, pp. 307329.
"Lapse of Meaning With Visual Fixation," Amer. J. Psychol., 35, pp. 446-
and the Areal Restriction of the Aftereffect, J. Eper. Pcychol.," 20, pp. SS 3(1937), 'Adaptation With
N egative After- Effect., ' ' Psy chol. Rev.,
Reports). Washington: U.S. Gov't. Printing Office.
41. Gibson, J.J., and Crooks, L.E. (1938),
tA Theoretical Field-Analysis of Automobile-Driving,'' Amer. J. Psyc/zol., 51,
42. Gibson, J.J., and Mowrer, O.H. (1938),
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Vestibular Nystagmus in the Visual Perception of a Moving Target in the I)ark,"
Hull, C.L. (1943), Principles of Behavior. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
ILS. Langfeld, and h.P. Weld, Poundalions of Psychology) New York: Wiley.
":ues,'' Arrier. J. PsycIlc)1., 61, pp. 1)123.
"The Innate Organizatio)fl of Visual Activity. I Perception of
Figures by Rats Reared in Total Darkness," J. (;enet. Psychol., 51, pp. 101Hebb, DO. (1937),
Study of the Perception of Object-Color,"
Hilgard, E.R. (1948), Theories of Learning. New York: Appleton-Century-Crolts.
Köhler, W. (1940), Dynamics in Psycho!ogy. New York: Liveright.
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Langeweisch., W. (1944), Stick and Rudder New York: McGraw-Hill.
"The Mechanism of Vision. XI' A Preliminary Test of Innate Organization,"
Le Conte, J. (1897), Sight. An Exposition
Lewin, K. (1936), Principles of Topological Psychology. New York: McGrawH i i I.
Pfaffmann, C. (1948), "Aircraft Landings Without Binocular Cues: A Study
Analysis of Binocular Vision. Princeton Univ. Press.
Artificial Penumbrae on the Brightness of
Included Areas, ' ' Miscellanea Psychologica Albert Michotte, Louvain: Institut
(1930), ItOptische Untetsuchungen am Ganzfeld. II Zur Phdnomen
of Visual Perception in Man and Chinipanzee," Science, 106, pp. 107- 108.
Rubin, E. (1921), Visuell Wahrgenommene Figuren. Copenhagen: Gyldendaiske
82. Metzger, W. (1936), Gesetze des Sehens.
Gestaltauffas sung bei operierten Jitindgeborenen
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Spitz, R.A., and Wolfe, K.M. (1946), "The
of Shape-Perception to Explicit Judgments of Inclination," Arch. Psychol.,
Untersuchungen Uber Phnomena1e IdentiTernus,
i 18. Wertheimer, M. (1912), "Experimentelle
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Accommodation, sensations of, 20; 21, degree
of, 72; as cue for distance, 111; reflex of,
Aviation psychology, 59, 107, 127, 131, 180
Binocular, cues for depth, 21, 22; disparity,
20, 21, 72, 100, 106, 107, 177; fusion, 103;
Brightness, as a cue for distance, 137; discrimination, i 10
Color, sensation, 15, 17; extensity, 17; constancy, 166; film, 166; surface, 166; memory,
objects, 169; index of, 171; of size at distance, 183; index of, 186
Convergence, 20, 21, 30, degree of, 72; as cue
Correspondence, projective, 47, 48, 53; psychophysical, shift in, 195, 196; 153, psychophysical, 57; 61, 62, 75, 104, 165
Cues, theory of, 19; for depth, 21, 22, 59; 69,
71, secondary, 72; primary, 72; 90, 103, 111,
for aircraft landing, 128, 129; for depth,
137, 138; conflicting, 149; reciprocal, 149;
for depth, 150; reliability of for space perception, 150; shading, 168; for depth, 171;
177,for behavior, 214, 215; for behavior, 221
l)epth, in vision, 15, of field, 112; test for
Depth at a contour, 93, 106, 107, 137, 138,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Depth perception, 6, 7, test for 107, 108
Disorientation, of man in visual space, 5, 6
Homogeneous stimulation, 4, 5, 6, 53, 64, 108
Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig von, 19, 21, 44,
Ego, phenomenal as explained by Mach 27, 28
Empiricism, 14, 15, 16, 17, 24, 206, 212, 216
Euclid, 36, 42, 54, 8, (Euclidean geometry),
Extensity, of space, 15, 16; in coior, 17; 169
Eye, defects as an optical instrument, 116
Eye movements, pursuit, 32; 57, 58, effect on
retinal gradient of motion, 124; compensary,
136; and pictorial composition, 155, 156;
saccadic, inhibition of vision during, 146,
Film, color, 5, 75, 65, 166; editing, 159; mo n-
Form, or shape in vision, 15; or shape in two
dimensions, 16, 17; transposability of, 18,
19; 99, (Form perception), past experience
Gradient, definition of, 73; of blur, 112;
physiological, 73; of density of texture, 78,
mary memory, 158, 159, 160; of the nose, 228
Instinct, theory of, 206; and discriminative
Koffka, 9, 23, 25, 28, 29, 40, 63, 64, 127,
Laws of sensory organization, 149, 191, 192
Linear perspective, 35, 36, 69, 71, 82, 85, 86,
Localization, of points in space, 15, theory
Location, of points, 15; of after-images, 31, 32
Locomotion, point of aim for, 123, 124; 127,
128, 131, perception of, 135; passive, 135,
136; 153, passive, 154; and retinal stimuli,
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Meaning, psychology of, 198, 199, 200, 202;
emotional, 199; social, 199; (use-meaning)
200, 202; linguistic, 202; context theory of,
Memory, immediate, 57; primary, 158, 159; 165
Modelling, perception of, 92; and grades of
Motion perspective, I 19, 120, 124, 140, 141
Motion pictures, 119, 130, ß4, sequence and
Movement, pursuit, 132; saccadic, 132; scro-
Negative after effect of tilt and curvature,
Order, definition of, 64; successive, 134;
adjacent, 134, 151, 154; successive, 154;
Ordinal stimulation, 56, 63, 64, 152, 168, 216
Organization, phys iological, 25 ; sensory,
Orientation, to physical environment, 229
Perception, relation to sensation, 12, 13; of
external world, 13, first visual, 17, 18;
constancy in, 33, 34; 43, 44, test for depth,
107, 108; depth, test for, 130; of acceleration, 134, 135; and sensation, 138; form,
past experience in, 192; meaningful, 198,
199; literaI, 210, 211; schematic, 211, 212;
Perspective, aerial, 72; 114, 116, 137, 141
Perspective, linear, 70, 82, 85, 86, 17, 18,
Phenomenal ego, 225, 226, stimuli for, 226
Picture plane, 54, 55, relation to retinal projettiOfl, 79, 104, 122, 153, 218
Primary memory, 158, 159, image, 160, 165
Projected form, definition of, iô; 188, 190,
shape, 34, 35; and transformation, 169; 171,
Projcctive correspondence, 47, 48, 534, 153,
psychophysical experimentation 9, correspondence, to visual perception, 8, 25, 51,
57, 61, 62, 5; shift in, 75; 104, 165, 195,
Relativity of motion, theory of, 126, 165, 189
Response, identifying, 202; smiling in the infant, 207; smiling in infants, 220; identifying, learned, 221
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
Retinal image, differentiation of, 8, 9; 33, 46,
50, 52, 57, 67, 61, 62, 79, 117, 118, motion,
Retinal receptors, density of, 48, 49; distribution of, 55
Saccadic eye movements, 29, 30, 126, 132,
Sensations, elementary, 19, 22, 107, 108; innate, 15, 163, 171, 218; point, 15, 22, 133,
Sensory organization, 22, 23, 215, 187; laws
Shading, 72, 94, 137, 143, 144; as a cue for
Shape,or form in vision, 15; or form in two dimensions, 16, 17; constancy of perceived
objects, 169; apparent, 171, 172, projected,
Social norms, 212; relation to perception, 211
Space, geometrical, 183, 188; sensation of, 8;
perception, analysis of, 4; perception, motor
Stereoscopic impressions, 4, photographs, 107
Stimulation, homogeneous, 53; ordinal, 63, 64;
Stimulus, method of impoverishing, 9, 10;
definition of, 63; distant, 63; proximal, 63;
definition of, 151, 152, 215; for a psychophysical experiment, 215
Stimulus variable, relation to visual space,
Superposition, 71, 137, 142, 177; type of
Symbols, 164, 204, 205, 212, in meaning, 199
Television camera, likeness to retina, 48;
Texture, compression of, 173; gradient of
density of, 66, 67; relation of to acuity, 110;
visual, elements and gaps of, 80, visual, 81
Theory, context (of meanìng), 203; instinct,
206; motor, of space perception, 223, 224
Transformation, 104, of images, 132; of retinal
pattern, 152; projective, 153, 169; groups,
Transposability, of form, 18, 19 , 55, 56, 151;
Vertical and horizontal axes, 148, 149, 150
Visual acuity, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 175
Visual field, boundaries of, 27, deformation o
Visual texture, 52, 65; elements and gaps o
PDF compression, OCR, web optimization using a watermarked evaluation copy of CVISION PDFCompressor
