Behavior is organized into stable action modes with qualitative transitions
between them. An ecological approach attempts to account for these
patterns in terms of physical and informational constraints, such as
attractors in the underlying dynamics of action and perceptual information
specific to them. Perception and action are coupled by laws of control that
relate informational variables to parameters of the action system so as to
regulate behavior adaptively. The case of optical flow fields and the
control of locomotion is developed in some detail. This approach implies a
view of perceptual-motor development as a process of discovering and
exploiting stabilities in the underlying dynamics and the information that
Behavior appears to be organized into stable action modes that exhibit
orderly patterns of movement, and yet the patterns are not stere()typed but
adapt to local conditions. An ecological approach to perception and action
seeks to accoun~ for this order and variability in movement as emerging -in
evolution, development and learning -- from physical and informational
constraints, without assuming sources of organization in co gnitive or
neural structures a priori. In this paper I discuss such physical and
informational constraints on action, with special reference to tne problem
of visually controlled locomotion. Although I am not a developmentalist, it
is my hope that these ideas may provide a useful theoretical foundation for
work on how such constraints are discovered, explored, and exploited in
the course of development to yield skilled perceiving and acting.
The basic idea I want to develop is that action-relevant inf()rmation is
both generated by and reciprocally used to regulate movement. In the
words of James Gibson (1979), from whom this insight stems, "We must
perceive in order to move, but we must also move in order to perceive," (p.
223). By information, Gibson meant spatio-temporal optic patterns at a
Sensory-Motor Organizations and Development in Infancy and Early Childhood. 23-37.
© 1990 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
moving eye, haptic patterns of joint, muscle, or skin deformation, and so
on, that are lawfully related to properties of the environment or aspects of
the action itself. We can elaborate this notion in terms of a
perception-action cycle, sketched in Figure 1, which is easiest to illustrate
for optical information. As Gibson (1950) first pointed out, when an
observer moves relative to the environment, a global pattern of optical
flow is generated at the moving point of observation and corresponds to
the class and direction of observer movement. Reciprocally, this
information can be used to regulate the forces applied by the observer in
controlling subsequent movements, which in turn generate a new flow
field, and so on in a circularly causal cycle. Without observer movement,
the flow field ceases to exist and it thus can rightly be called
Figure 1. The perception-action cycle, as illustrated by the generation and utilization of
Following Kugler & Turvey (1987; Kugler, Kelso, & Turvey, 1980,1981),
I want to argue that stable action modes, task-specific musculoskeletal
organizations, emerge from the underlying dynamics of the
organism-environment system, guided by movement-produced information
that is specific to those dynamics. In addition, each action mode is
governed by corresponding laws of control that tailor movement to local
conditions (Warren, 1988a). The perception-action cycle characterizes
this generation and utilization of information to coordinate and control
behavior. Together these physi~ and informational constraints should
allow us to account for the order and variability in movement.
Why do all four-legged animals exhibit essentially the same few gaits? As
we scale up on a speed-related control parameter, quadrupeds
systematically move from a walk to a trot to a canter or gallop (see
Warren, 1988b). This remarkable fact can be attributed to tne adhoc
adaptations of natural selection, or it can suggest a deeper principle at
work: given the task of forward progression and the physical constraints,
such as the requirement that the center of gravity be maintained (statically
or dynamically) over the base of support (Alexander, 1982), there are only
a few stable solutions for locomoting on four legs.
An analysis of the underlying dynamics of the organismenvi ronment
system should reveal relatively few stable regions in the state space of all
possible combinations of limb movements for the task of locomotion. Such
an analysis has recently been done on human juggling (Beek, 1989), for
which the task constraints are narrower and easier to analyze, but in
principle could be extended to the problem of gait. We can picture the
resulting dynamics as a potential landscape in which the l>asins of
attraction correspond to stable gaits. In an empirical study of treadmill
locomotion in horses, Hoyt & Taylor (1981) mapped out the energetic
landscape for walk'ing, trotting, and galloping as a function of speed,
revealing three V-shaped functions with well-defined minima at
characteristic speeds for each gait. When free locomotion was observed in
the field, the preferred speeds in each gait were near these minima. This
suggests that stable action modes have a basis in the qualitative fe atures of
Qualitative transitions between action modes result from scaling up on
the control parameter and pushing the system through a critical point.
This can be understood as a bifurcation in which a continuous change in
the control parameter yields a discontinuous change in an order
parameter, which provides a measure of the organization of the system
(Haken, 1983). For gait and other tasks involving inter-limb coordination,
the phase relations between limbs appear to provide the relevant order
parameter; the speed-related control parameter can be characterized by a
dimensionless Froude number (F =v2/ gh) that scales speed to leg length h
(Alexander & J ayes, 1983). Studies of the trot-gallop transition across a
wide variety of species reveal a sudden shift in phase of the forelimbs from
0.5 (out of phase) to 0.2 (nearly in phase) at a Froude value of about 2.5
(Alexander & Jayes, 1983). Thus, this critical point is a constant for the
quadrupedal dynamics. Furthermore, using Heglund, Taylor, &
McMahon's (1974) allometric equation that predicts the trotgallop
transition speed from body mass, we can predict that the horses in Hoyt &
Taylor's (1981) study shift gaits very near the point that their energy curves
intersect. Thus, the horses apparently change gaits to move toward an
energetically preferred or stable state. Kelso and his colleagues (1984;
Haken, Kelso, & Bunz, 1985) have modelled a similar phase shift in
bimanual finger oscillations as a second-order phase transition, satisfying
all the physical criteria of such a transition -- hysteresis, critical
fluctuations, critical slowing down, etc. Such tests remain to be done on
In contrast to ordinary physical systems, however, the behavior of
organisms is not determined by physical laws, even though it exhibits
regularities that are related to them. Stable action modes and the
transitions between them are not deterministically driven by the dynamics,
but rather guided by information that is specific to them. Kugler & Turvey
(1987) have proposed that such haptic information is generated during the
initial stages of movement in much the same way as is an optical flow field,
and can reciprocally be used to guide the system to a stable, preferred
movement-produced information is sensitive to the dynamics of its
interactions with the environment and can exploit the system's stabilities
and instabilities as a means of ordering its behavior. Specifically,
stabilities correspond to preferred regions of behavior, or stable action
modes, and critical points correspond to the qualitative transitions
between them. In this way, an ecological approach aims to account for the
emergence of order in movement in terms of the underlying dynamics of
Achieving a stable organization of the action system is, however, not
enough -- movements also have to be adapted to varying initial and
environmental conditions. I want to argue that every action mode is
governed by a corresponding set of laws of control that tailor the action to
local conditions. Given that an action mode is a task-specific organization
of the musculoskeletal system that reduces the dimensionality of the
system down to a few free parameters, movement can then be adapted by
allowing these parameters to be regulated by information. Here we get to
the heart of the perception-action coupling problem. How is it that optical
or haptic properties can be lawfully related to'the parameters of the action
system in such a way as to permit successful actions?
The problem can be outlined as follows. Standard dynamical laws -the
kinds of "laws" with which we are familiar -- predict the motions of bodies
based on their known masses and the forces acting on them. Thu s, they
predict kinematic quantities having the dimensions of length and time,
such as acceleration (LT -2), or geometric quantities having the dim ension
of length, such as the shape of a parabolic trajectory (L2), from dynamic or
kinetic quantities having the dimensions of mass, length, and time, such as
force (MLT-2). Thus, dynamic laws have the form (MLT) --> (LT). It is
impossible to do the reverse, however, as a dimension is lost. One cannot
predict force and mass from the motions of a body, because the problem is
underconstrained -there are infinitely many combinations of force and
mass that will produce exactly the same motion.
The laws of ecological optics or haptics are of a similar form. Tl'le light
reflected from environmental surfaces to a point of observation forms a
low-energy field with a spatial patterning of intensity that Gibson called
the optic array. Motions of objects or observers produce spatiotemporal
changes in this structure. Because the mass of the photons is small and
informationally insignificant, a changing optic array is best characterized
as a kinematic field with dimensions (LT), determined by the dynamics of
. moving objects and observers (ML T). Thus, the form of the I aws of
ecological optics is also (MLT) -- > (LT). Kugler & Turvey (1987) have
argued that patterns of haptic deformation over joints, muscles, tendons,
and tissues likewise form a low-energy kinematic field. In the domain of
event perception, Runeson (1977) pointed out that it is also typically
impossible to invert these laws to determine, for example, the mass of a
moving object from its motion, but that higher-order dynamic
relationships such as the relative mass of two colliding objects is in fact
specified by kinematic information (see also Todd & Warren, 1982). For
the control of action, we must be able to use kinematic informa tion to
regulate action parameters that can only be characterized as dynamic -the
force, impulse, stiffness, work, and energy quantities relevant to moving
limb and body masses in a manner coordinated with the environment. In
short, we need a new class of laws of the form (LT) -- > (MLT), by which
macroscopic variables of optic or haptic fields are harnessed to govern
macroscopic parameters of the action system. These are what I am calling
In order to justify these relations as laws, they should not be ad hoc and
local but require a principled basis. It is possible, for example, that
evolution opportunistically coupled particular information variables to
action variables because they worked well enough under narrow
conditions. However, a more principled basis for writing law statements is
clearly preferable. For an ordinary physical system, the behavior of a
particle in a high-energy field is lawfully driven by the dynamics of the
field itself toward its attract or states. An organism in a low-energy haptic
field, on the other hand, is not deterministically driven by the field, but
uses the field as information to organize its behavior, following its
gradients to locate stable action modes. In this case, the qualitative
topological features of such movement-produced information have an
intrinsic meaning, as they are isomorphic with and specific to the attractor
states of the dynamics. This is the essence of Kugler's notion of
"information as kinematic form" -- the form of the haptic field is
intrinsically related to the dynamics of the action system. Consequently,
singularities of the kinematic field specify an equivalence class of
configurations of action parameters, acting to order or enslave these
subsystems' behavior (Haken, 1983; Kugler & Turvey, 1987). We can begin
to see a general principle for laws of control here, based on inverse
mappings from the singularities of the kinematic field to the required
dynamic configurations of the action system.
However, the regulation of action modes by optical information to
coordinate movement with the environment is not as straightforward. The
singularity in the flow field does not specify a preferred dynamic state, and
does not identify a behavioral attractor. An organism in a low-energy
optical flow field is neither deterministically driven by the field, nor can it
simply follow the field's gradients; rather it selectively harnesses different
properties of the field in order to regulate the free parameters of different
actions. Certain control relations, such as those that regulate the timing of
movement based on a kinematic property such as Lee's (1974)
time-to-contact variable tau (t), have the form (LT) -- > (T) and do not
face the problem of the lost dimension. But what can be the principled
basis for laws of control that relate kinematic variables to dynamic action
At this point, I see two potential avenues to a solution. One is to identify
control laws that specify relative values of dynamic variables, akin to
Runeson's solution for event perception (see Warren, 1988). Thus, for
example, rather than specifying the amount of force required to jump a
barrier during running, the law would specify the change in force required
relative to that being applied in the current step cycle (Warren & Kelso,
1985). The change in height produced by current force is given by vertical
oscillation in optical flow, so that the ratio of required force to current
force is specified by the ratio of barrier height to current height, given
optically. In effect, this approach scales kinematic information to the
current dynamic state in order to establish a common basis of
measurement, so that the kinematics can then specify the required
The other approach is to restore the lost dimension by using mass as a
scaling term. In th~ case of Newton's second law, for example, if mass is
constant we can take a known force into acceleration, or, inversely, a
known acceleration into force. For the present case, it is body mass that
matters for locomotion and limb mass that matters for manipulatio n, and
these terms are either constants or available haptically. Mass changes due
to added loads, as when handling an object or carrying a backpack, are also
specified haptically. Thus, if mass is given, it can provide a scaling te rm for
laws of control that relate kinematic information to the dynamic,
Either of these approaches could resolve the problem of the lost
dimension and provide a principled basis for control relations that may
justifiably be called lawful. The perception-action system exploits these
informational laws in much the same way that it exploits dynamic laws. Just
as all four-legged animals exhibit the same few gaits, species spanning the
evolutionary tree from flies to humans use the tau variable to regulate the
timing of their actions -- there are just not that many stable solutions. It is
in this sense that the organization and adaptability of action may
ultimately be accounted for in terms of physical and informational
constraints. Let me now try to provide some more details about kinematic
optical flow fields in the context of controlling locomotion before
returning to the problem of the perception-action coupling.
Figure 2. Velocity field representation of optical flow generated by observer translation
parallel to ground plane. Each vector represents the optical velocity of an envir~nmental
element, vertical line indicates heading.
How do locomoting observers see where they're going, in order to control
their steering? Gibson (1950) first showed that translation through a
stable environment generates a global radial pattern of optical flow at the
moving point of observation (Figure 2). The focus of outflow, a singularity
in the flow field, specifies the observer's direction of selfmotion or
heading, which is also implicit in any sufficiently large sample of the radial
flow pattern. Gibson (1958, 1979) developed this idea as the basis for his
theory of the visual control of action, whereby the informational structure
is both generated by and reciprocally used to regulate movement in a
However, experiments on perception of heading have reported levels of
accuracy insufficient for the control of action. Cutting (1986) estimates
that about 1 deg. of accuracy is required to steer high-speed locomotion,
but experiments using random-dot displays and pointing tasks have shown
mean heading errors of 5 to 10 deg. (Johnston, White, & Cumming, 1973;
Llewellyn, 1971; R. Warren, 1976). Worse, it is frequently pointed out that
the addition of a rotational component of movement, such as a pursuit eye
movement, radically alters the retinal flow field and destroys the
invariance of Gibson's radial outflow pattern (Figure 3; Regan &
Beverley, 1981). How, then, can the kinematic optical flow field provide a
lawful basis for the control of locomotion?
Figure 3. Velocity field generated by combined translation and rotation, due to translating
toward vertical line while fixating the circle on the passing ground surf ace.
In some recent research, we set out to examine systematically the basic
components of the flow field: (1) The translational component, the radial
flow pattern generated by observer translation (Figure 2). (2) The
rotational component, produced by observer rotation about the
approximate nodal point of the eye, which only influences the retinal flow
pattern and not the optic array. Pursuit eye movements generate
translational flow, whereas rotation about the line of sight generates
rotary flow. (3) The curvilinear component, a hyperbolic flow pattern
generated by curvilinear movement of the observer on a circular path
(Figure 4). In the spirit of Gibson (1954, 1968), our working hypothesis
was that these different classes of observer movement are specified by
corresponding classes of optical flow, and that complex flow patterns
produced by combinations of these components can be decomposed to
Figure 4. Velocity field generated by curvilinear movement parallel to ground plane. Vertical
line lies on the observer's future path and the locomotor flow line.
We examined these questions in a series of experiments using
computer-generated displays that simulated observer movement relative
to random-dot surfaces. We asked observers to judge whether they were
heading to the left or right of a target that appeared on the horizon in the
last frame of the display, rather than using a pointing task in an
undifferentiated field. By varying the heading angle between the focus of
outflow and the target, we could measure accuracy in terms of a heading
threshold, the angle at which the observer was 75% correct. In studies of
observer translation over a ground plane, which produces the classic radial
outflow pattern (Figure 2), we found that the mean heading threshold was
1.20 with dot densities of 60 down to 3 dots, over a range of observer
speeds from a slow walk to a fast run (Warren, Morris, & Kalish, 1988).
With 2 dots, however, there was a significant drop in performance. This
indicates that observers do not rely on a stationary element at the local
focus of outflow, which is undefined with low dot densities, or classic
2-element parallax, but rather on the radial structure of the flow pattern.
The results are consistent with Gibson's notion that observers perceive
their translational heading from the global radial outflow pattern, with an
accuracy sufficient to control locomotion.
However, natural locomotion is often more complex than linear
translation and typically includes movement on curvilinear paths, which
generates a characteristic hyperbolic flow pattern (Figure 4). Pe rception
of curvilinear heading, the future curved path of motion, rather than the
instantaneous tangential heading would thus permit the prospective
control of locomotion on circular paths. Lee & Lishman (1977) noted that
the future path is specified by the locomotor flow line on the ground
surface -- that field line that passes directly beneath the observer, which is
locally defined by elements on or near the path. Alternatively, curvilinear
heading may be specified by the observer's position relative to the global
structure of the flow field, which is implicit in the motions of a few
elements. In these experiments, the target appeared on the ground surface
16 m ahead and observers judged whether they would pass to the left or
right of it if they continued on their current path (Warren, Mestre,
Blackwell, & Morris, 1989). The results show good heading accuracy for a
path radius of R = 50 eyeheights or more, with mean a heading threshold of
1.5 deg. for a ground surface, comparable to those for observer
translation. However, performance deteriorated with smaller radii -- at
R =25 observers reported heading 3.0 deg. to the outside of the target with
a ground surface, but -3.1 deg. to the inside of the target when approaching
a wall surface and -1.5 deg. to the inside with a 3D cloud of dots. This
heading error could be an artifact of a small display screen, but in any case
it is relatively small and would not greatly impair the control of
locomotion. Accuracy remained constant with dot densities down to just 2
dots, indicating that a locally defined locomotor flow line is not necessary
and that the global field structure is implicit in the flow of only a few
elements. Thus, observers can distinguish curvilinear heading from
tangential heading under all conditions, and can perceive the former with
sufficient accuracy to allow prospective control of locomotion.
The addition of an observer rotation during translation, such as a
pursuit eye movement to track a passing object, replaces the singularity at
the heading point with one at the fixation point and significantly
complicates the retinal flow pattern (Figure 3). If we simply relied on the
singularity in the field, we would always appear to be heading toward the
fixation point. How do observers resolve the translational and rotational
components to distinguish the direction they're heading from the direction
they're looking? We examined this issue in a series of experiments on
translation and rotation, varying environmental structure (Warren &
Hannon, 1988, 1989). The key experiment used a fixation point on the
ground surface and a translucent reduction screen that faded out the edges
of the display. In the Moving condition the fixation point moved like a spot
on the ground, yielding an actual eye rotation. In the Simulated condition,
we simulated the flow pattern that would Occur with a combined
translation and rotation, but the fixation point was actually stationary on
the screen so no eye rotation occurred (Figure 3). The resulting mean
thresholds were 1.3 deg. in the moving condition and 1.5 deg. in the
simulated condition, with no significant difference. Further, in the
simulated condition observers had the illusion that their eye was actually
moving! This demonstrates that the visual system can de.compose
translation and rotation on the basis of the flow pattern alone, WIthout an
occulomotor signal or multiple fixations to factor out the contribution of
the eye movement. Subsequent experiments with a wall and a cloud
indicated that 3D environmental structure yielding differential motion
between neighboring elements may be both necessary and sufficient for
this visual decomposition of the flow pattern.
Thus, contrary to earlier reports, observers can perceive their di rection
of self-motion from optical flow with sufficient accuracy to control
locomotion. Different classes of observer movement are perceived from
different classes of optical flow patterns, and translation and r?tation c.an
be decomposed on the basis of optical flow alone. ConSIstent WIth
Gibson's vision, it looks like optical flow patterns can provide a lawful
basis for the guidance of locomotion. What is required is to elucidate t~e
laws of control that couple kinematic flow field variables to the dynamIC
It remains to bring dynamic and informational constraints together to bear
on the perception-action cycle. Consider once again the example of the
organization and regulation of locomotion. At low speeds, humans and
other animals adopt a stable walking gait in which the body behaves much
like an inverted pendulum, exchanging kinetic and potential energy as it
pivots up and over the ankle in the stance phase. But a critical spee d, there
is an abrubt transition to a running gait in which the body behaves more
like a bouncing ball, exchanging kinetic and elastic energy during stance
by storing elastic energy in the tendons and projecting i~self back into the
air. There is considerable evidence for such a bounCIng ball model of
running (Alexander, 1984; Goslow, et aI., 1981), although the amount of
energy conserved is still open to question. The action system apparently
reorganizes from a pendulum into a bou~cing ball ~y sensing and rid.ing
the dynamic manifold determined by phYSIcal constraInts -- some of WhICh,
in this case, are reified in the morphology of the limbs and tendons.
A bouncing ball is a damped, nonconservative oscillator that di ssipates
energy in the form of heat during compression. Thus, its oscillations will
decrease in amplitude until it stops. This can be represented in a phase
portrait, which plots amplitude against velocity, as a trajectory t~at sp!rals
down to a point attractor at the origin. To keep the ball bounCIng WIth a
sustained oscillation, we can provide the system with a means of
periodically injecting energy to replace that dissipated on each cycle -such
as muscles that contract during the stance phase. The resulting trajectory
in the phase plane is a limit cycle attractor, a closed periodic orbit that will
be maintained as long as the system's energy stores last. This is the
attractor associated with sustained running and specified by haptic
movement-produced information. But although the action is stable, it is
also stereotyped and blind. In order to achieve a controlled oscillation
such that movement is coordinated with the external environment, we must
provide the system with a means of modulating the energy squirt to take
appropriately longer and shorter hops to avoid obstacles and land on clear
ground -such as a visual-motor system governed by a law of control for
running. The resulting phase portrait is a band of trajectories that wind
around the limit cycle, never settling down into a fixed orbit, as the
injected energy is regulated from cycle to cycle.
We have found evidence for such a control system in experiments on the
visual regulation of running in adults (Lee, Lishman, & Thompson, 1982;
Warren, Young, & Lee, 1986; Warren & Yaffe, 1989). By asking runners to
land on a series of irregularly spaced targets, we concluded that the
primary parameter used to vary step length is the vertical impulse applied
to the ground during the stance phase, rather than the horizontal impulse
or the forward reach of the foot at heelstrike. Vertical impulse (Iz) affects
the stance and flight times (total step time T), and thus the forward
distance travelled, according to the simple relation T = Iz/mg. Variation
in vertical impulse accounted for 99% of the variation in the forward
distance travelled by the body during treadmill running, as inferred from
kinematic measurements, and 80% in overground running, as measured
directly with a force platform. Such vertical modulation makes sense from
the point of view of a bouncing ball, in which elastic energy is returned in a
vertical direction while horizontal speed remains constant; this is more
efficient than varying horizontal impulse or forward reach, both of which
affect speed and require compensatory braking or acceleration on
What is the law of control for step length in running? The step time T
required to bridge two upcoming targets is equal to the difference in time
to contact with them, optically specified by + t. Inverting the above
relation, we obtain a control function Iz = mg+ t, according to which
vertical impulse is regulated by the difference in tau for the two targets.
Thus, we have a potential law of control that uses body mass as a scaling
parameter to relate a kinematic optical variable to a dynamic action
parameter. Although we have not tested this hypothesis directly, when we
covered up the approaching targets ahead of the runner, error data
indicated that the runner must have visual information about both targets
between 100 and 400 ms before landing on the second target -that is, while
approaching and landing on the first target. This is at least consistent with
the idea that the runner is monitoring + t while preparing to kick off from
the first target in order to regulate the vertical impulse of t he kick,
automatically yielding an appropriate step length. Thus, the action system
appears to take maximum advantage of the physical constraints on
running, and relies on a minimal control structure captured by a simple
What is needed, I believe, is to bring together our new understanding of
the dynamics of action systems with our knowledge of ecological optics in
order to attack the problem of the perception-action coupling_ Recent
dynamical methods allow us, for example, to determine the dimen sionality
of an action mode attractor from measurements of macroscopic variables
(Kay, 1989). By assessing the dimensionality of the action system under
varying visual conditions, we may be able to determine its control
parameters and ultimately relate them to optical variables, such as the
relations between optical flow and forces applied against the ground in
steering locomotion. Ultimately, we should be able to map out the
attractor states and laws of control for the basic locomotor modes,
revealing the source of their organization and adaptability in physical and
This approach has implications for the study of perceptual-motor
development (see Thelen, this volume; Goldfield, this volume). It suggests
a view of development as a process of exploring the dynamics of action in
order to discover regions of stability for particular tasks, be it reaching,
pounding, or crawling. These attractors can only be found by sensing the
haptic gradients that specify them, and thus this involves an exploration of
the informational as well as dynamic state space. As the a ttractors
themselves are identified, the infant must also discover how to modulate
them, using information to control the free parameters of an action mode.
On a micro scale, certain developmental patterns may be attributable to
the process of exploring and differentiating this space, for example
Thelen's results on exploiting non-muscular forces to reduce the active
contribution in controlling arm movements (this volume). On a more
macro scale, because the dynamics of movement are continually changing
due to rapid physical growth in infancy, some developmental sequences
may be accounted for not by maturation per se, but by the changing
dynamic landscape that accompanies maturation. Thus the ecological
approach's emphasis on physical and informational constraints points
developmental research in a particular direction -- toward examining how
dynamic stabilities and laws of control are discovered and explointed in
Kugler, P.N., Kelso, J.A.S. & Turvey, M.T. (1982). On the control and coordination of
naturally developing systems. In: J.A.S. Kelso & J.E. Clark (Eds.). The development of
movement control and coordination. New York: John Wiley.
Kugler, P.N. & Turvey, M.T. (1987). Information, natural law, and the self-assembly
of rhythmic movement. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Alexander, R.M. (1982). Locomotion of animals. Glasgow: B1ackie.
Lee, D.N. (1974). Visual information during locomotion. In R.B. Macleod & H. Pick (Eds.).
Perception: Essays in honor of lames I. Gibson. New York: Wiley.
Alexander, R.M. (1984). Elastic energy stores in running vertebrates. American
Alexander, R.M. & Jayes, A.S. (1983). A dynamic similarity hypothesis for the gaits of
quadrupedal mammals. I ournal of Zoology (London), 201,135-152.
Cutting, J.E. (1986). Perception with an eye for motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, J.J. (1950). Perception of the visual world. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J.J. (1954). The visual perception of objective motion and subjective movement.
Gibson, J.J. (1958). Visually controlled locomotion and visual orientation in animals.
British lournal of Psychology, 49,182-194.
Gibson, J.J. (1968). What gives rise to the perception of motion? Psychological Review,
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton
Goslow, G.E., Seeherman, H.J., Taylor, c.R., Mc Cutchin, M.N. & Heglund, N.C. (1981).
Electrical activity and relative length changes of dog limb muscles as a function of speed
and gait. I ournal of Experimental Biology, 94,15-42.
Lee, D.N. & Lishman, R. (1977). Visual control of locomotion. Scandinavian lournal of
Lee, D.N., Lishman, J.R. & Thompson, J.A. (1982). Regulation of gait in long jumping.
lournal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8,
Llewellyn, K.R. (1971). Visual guidance of locomotion. lournal of Experimental
Runeson, S. (1977). On visual perception of dynamic events. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis:
Studia Psychologica Upsaliensia (Series 9).
Todd, J.T. & Warren, W.H. (1982). Visual perception of relative mass in dynamic events.
Warren, W.H. (1988a). Action modes and laws of control for the visual guidance of action.
In: O. Meijer & K. Roth (Eds.). Movement behavior: The motor-action
controversy. Amsterdam: North Holland, 339-379.
Warren, W.H. (1988b). Critical behavior in perception-action systems. In: J.A.S. Kelso, A.J.
Mandell & M.E. Shlesinger (Eds.). Dynamic patterns in complex systems. Singapore:
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics: An introduction (3rd Ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Warren, W.H. & Hannon, D.J. (1988). Direction of self-motion is perceived from optical
Haken, H., Kelso, J.A.S. & Bunz, H. (1985). A theoretical model of phase transitions in
human hand movements. Biological Cybernetics, 51,347-356.
Warren, W.H. & Hannon, D.J. (1989). Eye movements and optical flow. Submitted for
Heglund, N.C., Taylor, C.R. & McMahon, T.A. (1974). Scaling stride frequency and gait to
animal size: Mice to horses. Science, 186,1112-1113.
Warren, W.H. & Kelso, J.A.S. (1985). Report of the work group on perception and ac tion. In:
Warren, W.H. & Shaw, R.E. (Eds.). Persistence and change: Proceedings of the
First International Conf erence on Event Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hoyt, D.F. & Taylor, C.R. (1981). Gait and the energetics of locomotion in horses. Nature,
Johnston, I.R., White, G.R. & Cumming, R.W. (1973). The role of optical expansion patterns
in locomotor control. American lournal of Psychology, 86,311-324.
Kay, B.A. (1988). The dimensionality of movement trajectories and the degrees of freedom
problem: A tutorial. Human Movement Science, 7,343-364.
Kelso, J.A.S. (1984). Phase transitions and critical behavior in human bimanual
coordination. American lournal of Physiology, 246, Rl000-Rl004.
Kugler, P.N., Kelso, J.A.S. & Turvey, M.T. (1980). On the concept of coordinative structures
as dissipative structures: I. Theoretical lines of convergence. In: G.E. Stelmach & J.
Requin (Eds.). Tutorials in motor behavior. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Warren, W.H., Mestre, D.R., Blackwell, A.W. & Morris, M.W. (1989). Perception of
curvilinear heading f rom optical flow. Submitted for publication.
Warren, W.H., Morris, M.W. & Kalish, M. (1988). Perception of translational heading from
optical flow. lournal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Warren, W.H. & Yaffe, D. (1989). Dynamics of step length adjustment during running: A
reply to Patla, et. al.I ournal of Experimental Psychology: Human Percept; on and
Warren, W.H., Young, D.S. & Lee, D.N. (1986). Visual control of step length during running
over irregular terrain. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
