9) Working Title: Production planning using dynamic planned lead times: A
Production planning and control (PPC) systems are designed to efficiently manage the flow of
materials and goods and the utilization of people, equipment and capacity. In order to handle the
complexity of manufacturing firms, it is advantageous to decompose the management task into
partial parts coordinated by a hierarchical structure (see Bertrand et al. 1990). Planning levels
are interrelated by instructions (e.g. order release decision of upper/centralized planning level)
and feedback (e.g. system feedback from lower planning level such as decentralized sequencing
decisions for a production unit). This basic structure is fundamental for PPC systems and without
the management of lead-times the hierarchical coordination is undermined.
Determining an appropriate planning value for lead-times is a rather difficult task. Planned leadtimes refer to the planned time that elapses between the release of an order (the period an order
enters the manufacturing system) and its completion. Thus planned lead-times are a planning
parameter. In contrast, the actual time an order takes to make it through the production system
is called production lead-times or flow-times (hereinafter flow-times) and is used as a
performance measure. Flow-times consist of processing, setup, control, transport, and waiting
times whereas the latter is the governing factor. Waiting times are a result from queuing (e.g.
jobs queue before and after processing) which heavily depends on the amount of jobs in the
system. Especially in make-to-order (MTO) industries with complex material flow (e.g. job shops)
realized flow-times are often erratic and too long. There are two alternative research approaches
handling planned lead-times differently: either by a reactive lead-time management approach
(lead-times are supposed to be an exogenous variable) or by a pro-active approach (lead-times
are supposed to be an endogenous variable).
The reactive lead-time management approach includes three streams of research
(1) Due date assignment models, (2) Material Requirement Planning and (3) Forecasting
of lead-times (w.r.t. (3) see Selcuk et al. 2006, 2009; Enns, Suwanruji 2004; Selcuk
The pro-active lead-time management approach aims to control the actual flow-times to
match pre-determined norms - the workload control concept.
The focus of this thesis is on the reactive lead-time management approach. Only few studies
(Selcuk et al. 2006; 2009; Enns, Suwanruji 2004; Selcuk 2013) exist on this topic and to the best
of our knowledge no study on this topic uses a machine learning approach. In the field of
operations management machine learning is mostly used for flexible manufacturing systems,
due date assignment/quotation and scheduling. This thesis should design a model of a
manufacturing system that uses a reactive lead-time management approach by using a machine
The student should start with a description of the general (methodical) approach and the
relationship to other methods like neural networks, meta-models, decision trees etc… The model
size and specific characteristics as well as a possible benchmark model should be discussed
with the advisor. Additionally (after the completion of the concept of this thesis), there is a
possibility that the student gets access to data from a semi-conductor company.
Keywords: dynamic planned lead times, production planning, machine learning
Bertrand, J.W.M.; Wortmann, J.C.; Wijngaard, J.: Production control: A structural and design oriented
Enns, S.T.; Suwanruji, P.: Workload responsive adjustment of planned lead times. Journal of
Manufacturing Technology and Management, Vol.15, p.90–100, 2004.
Selçuk, B.; Adan, I.; De Kok, T.; Fransoo, J.: An explicit analysis of the lead time syndrome: stability
condition and performance evaluation. International Journal of Production Research, Vol.47 (9),
Selçuk, B.: Adaptive lead time quotation in a pull production system with lead time responsive demand.
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, Vol.32 (1), p.138-146, 2013
Selçuk, B.; Fransoo, J.; De Kok, T.: The effect of updating lead times on the performance of hierarchical
planning systems. International Journal of Production Economics, Vol.104 (2), p.427–440, 2006.
