Upper processing stages of the perception – action
Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute, 750 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, 90095-1759, USA
The neural substrate for behavioral, cognitive and
linguistic actions is hierarchically organized in the cortex of the frontal lobe. In their methodologically impeccable study, Koechlin et al. reveal the neural dynamics
of the frontal hierarchy in behavioral action. Progressively higher areas control the performance of actions
requiring the integration of progressively more complex
and temporally dispersed information. The study substantiates the crucial role of the prefrontal cortex in the
In 1874, the Russian neuroanatomist W. Betz [1] was the
first to note a major functional dichotomy of structures
along the nerve axis. Posterior structures are largely
devoted to sensory functions, anterior structures to motor
functions. This division of labor is most obvious in the
spinal cord. We can also discern it in the cerebral cortex,
however, if we expand sensory functions to include
representations acquired through the senses and motor
functions to include executive representations. A wealth of
physiological and neuropsychological evidence points to a
hierarchy of executive areas in the lateral cortex of the
frontal lobe [2]. The primary motor and premotor areas
constitute the lowest levels of that hierarchy. Above them
in the hierarchy lie a series of progressively higher,
anatomically more anterior areas of association cortex
that are designated ‘prefrontal’. Using fMRI on human
subjects performing visuomotor tasks, Koechlin et al. [3]
expose for the first time the cascading neurodynamics of
the executive frontal hierarchy in motor action. Motor
processing and control proceed from anterior prefrontal,
through caudal prefrontal, to premotor cortex. At each
level, the processing is informed by the processing at
higher levels and by controlling sensory information
which, as it moves down the hierarchy, is progressively
simpler, more demanding of immediate action and less of
The tasks of Koechlin et al. consisted of sequences of
manual reactions to visual stimuli of varying complexity.
The reaction to each stimulus depended on its visual
features (e.g. color with or without a pattern ‘context’) and
an instructional cue that preceded the sequence to which
that stimulus belonged. All motor reactions and the
significance of each instructional cue were part of a set
of rules that the subject had learned before the experiment. The key measurement was the degree of activation
in anterior (rostral) and posterior (caudal) prefrontal
Corresponding author: Joaquı́n M. Fuster (joaquinf@ucla.edu).
cortex, and in premotor cortex. The authors used a
computational model based on Shannon’s information
theory [4] and a hierarchical model of frontal organization
and processing [2]. By factor analysis of the fMRI data,
they determined that rostral prefrontal cortex controls
behavior mainly in accordance with the instructional cue
(‘temporal episode’), caudal prefrontal cortex with the
context of the stimulus, and premotor cortex with the
The hierarchical, cascading model of Koechlin et al. can be
best understood by considering the functional position of
frontal areas in the representational map of the cerebral
cortex and in the perception– action cycle. The map
delineates the cortical distribution of neuronal networks
of knowledge and long-term memory acquired by experience. The perception – action cycle is the circular flow of
information from the environment to sensory structures,
to motor structures, back again to the environment, to
sensory structures, and so on, during the processing of
Memory is formed in the cortex from the bottom up,
along ontogenetic gradients, from primary areas to
progressively higher areas of association. Primary sensory
areas constitute the bottom stage of the perceptual
hierarchy. The cellular structure of these areas constitutes
a kind of innate ‘memory’ (phyletic memory), acquired by
evolution and available to ‘instant recall’ – that is, sensation. Moving away from that bottom layer of primordial
sensory memory, networks of memories pertaining to that
individual expand into association cortex. Memory networks are formed by modulation of synapses by Hebbian
principles [5,6]. By mechanisms still poorly understood,
the hippocampus and the amygdala play important roles
in that neocortical process of memory formation [7]. As the
individual acquires new memories and items of knowledge, these are added to the established ones, such that the
hierarchically higher cortices of temporal and parietal
regions become the stores for the more complex and
abstract aspects of knowledge (see Figure 1).
Whereas perceptual memory accumulates in posterior
cortex, executive memory does so in frontal cortex, also
following the ontogenetic gradient from primary to association cortex. Here the lowest hierarchical level is the
primary motor cortex (motor phyletic memory): this
cortex represents – and integrates – movements defined
by muscles and muscle groups, including those of the
phonetic apparatus (i.e. speech). At a higher level is the
Figure 1. Representational map of the human lateral cortex. (a) Schema of the hierarchical organization of memory and knowledge. (b) Approximate topographic distribution of memory networks, using the same color code as in (a). (Abbreviation:
RF, Rolandic fissure). Red dashed lines demarcate the three frontal areas probed in
the experiment by Koechlin et al. [3]. Modified from [9].
premotor cortex, which represents and integrates movements defined by the current trajectory and immediate goal.
At the highest levels are a number of areas of prefrontal
cortex, whose hierarchical rank is not well understood,
representing the more complex schemas or plans of goaldirected action. Because the execution of these schemas or
plans requires the mediation of cross-temporal contingencies, the prefrontal cortex is essential for the temporal
integration and organization of behavior [8,9].
All forms of adaptive behavior require the processing of
streams of sensory information and their transduction into
series of goal-directed actions. In all but the most primitive
animal species the entire process is regulated by external
(environmental) and internal feedback [10,11]. At all levels
of the central nervous system, the processing of sensoryguided sequential actions flows from posterior (sensory) to
anterior (motor) structures, with feedback at every level.
Thus, at cortical levels, information flows in circular
fashion through a series of hierarchically organized areas
and connections that constitute the perception –action
cycle (Figure 2). Automatic and well-rehearsed actions in
response to simple stimuli are integrated at low levels of
the cycle, in sensory areas of the posterior (perceptual)
hierarchy and in motor areas of the frontal (executive)
hierarchy. More complex behavior, guided by more complex and temporally remote stimuli, requires integration
at higher cortical levels of both perceptual and executive
hierarchies, namely areas of higher sensory association
Figure 2. The cortical substrate of the perception–action cycle. Blue represents the
perception side of the cycle, and red the action side. Unlabeled rectangles represent intermediate areas or subareas of labeled cortex. (Abbreviation: prefr., prefrontal). Arrows represent pathways anatomically identified in the monkey. The
inset with the human brain highlights the reciprocal connectivity between posterior and frontal cortices. Modified from [9].
To support interactions between the two cortical
hierarchies, long corticocortical fibers (green arrows in
Figure 1) connect, both reciprocally and topologically,
areas in the perceptual hierarchy with areas of equivalent
rank in the executive one. Thus, premotor areas connect
with relatively low areas of sensory association, whereas
prefrontal areas connect with higher associative areas of
posterior cortex [13– 15]. Furthermore, there is anatomical evidence of an orderly descent of connections from
prefrontal to premotor to motor cortex [16 –18]. With their
fMRI-analysis of ‘path coefficients’, Keochlin et al. essentially substantiate this descending frontal connectivity
At each stage of the cascading process in the frontal
executive hierarchy, the precise next action in a sequence
is determined by two kinds of influences: (i) the processing
of the global aspects of the sequence in upper frontal
areas and (ii) the sensory signals occurring at the time.
Accordingly, as Koechlin et al. also show, the activation of
progressively lower frontal areas that process the action is
cumulative. At the same time, the associative sensory
inputs from posterior cortex are progressively more
concrete and more dependent on immediate temporal
and spatial context. Signals that have to be processed in a
wider temporal context (‘episodic’) require actions that
depend on higher degrees of temporal integration. These
signals are processed in posterior cortex and concomitantly in the higher (rostral) areas of prefrontal cortex. In
both cortices simultaneously, the signals are integrated
with previous information (the rules of the task and the
‘instructional cue’ in their study) before they inform the
processing in lower stages of the frontal hierarchy. Hence,
the prefrontal cortex integrates the most elaborate and
time-spanning associations of sensory information that
are stored in networks of perceptual and executive cortex.
Prefrontal integration works not only across time, but
also across different sensory modalities such as audition
and vision [19]. Contrary to a common misconception,
nowhere in an ascending or descending cortical hierarchy
does processing need to be exclusively serial. In part
because of its dependence on feedback throughout, the
processing in the perception– action cycle takes place not
only in series but also in parallel. Koechlin et al. provide us
with clear evidence that the cascading serial and parallel
processing of action entails the orderly downward activation of the executive frontal hierarchy.
In cognitive neuroscience, the methodology of human
studies is inextricably related to that of non-human
primate studies. As the research of Koechlin et al. so
beautifully exemplifies, modern neuroimaging in humans
can test and substantiate hypotheses of cognitive function
that derive from monkey studies. Conversely, imaging
data on the cognitive activation of the human cortex lead
to hypotheses of mechanism at the cellular level that can
best be tested in the non-human primate. An urgent item
in the neuroscientist’s agenda, which will benefit both
human and non-human methodologies, is to elucidate at
the cellular level the neural– hemodynamic coupling
underlying functional imaging methods such as fMRI.
1 Betz, W. (1874) Anatomischer Nachweis zweier Gehirncentra. Centralblatt für die medizinische Wissenschaften. 12, 578 – 580.595 – 599
2 Fuster, J.M. (1997) The Prefrontal Cortex – Anatomy Physiology, and
Neuropsychology of the Frontal Lobe, Lippincott-Raven
3 Koechlin, E. et al. (2003) The architecture of cognitive control in the
human prefrontal cortex. Science 302, 1181 – 1185
4 Berlyne, D. (1957) Uncertainty and conflict: a point of contact between
information theory and behavior theory concepts. Psychol. Rev. 64,
5 Hebb, D.O. (1949) The Organization of Behavior, John Wiley and Sons
6 Kandel, E.R. (1991) Cellular mechanisms of learning and the biological
basis of individuality. In Principles of Neural Science (Kandel, E.R.
et al., eds), pp. 1009– 1031, Appleton & Lange
7 Squire, L.R. and Kandel, E.R. (1999) Memory, Scientific American
8 Luria, A.R. (1966) Higher Cortical Functions in Man, Basic Books
9 Fuster, J.M. (2001) The prefrontal cortex – an update: time is of the
10 Uexküll, J.V. (1926) Theoretical Biology, Harcourt, Brace
11 Fuster, J.M. (2003) Cortex and Mind: Unifying Cognition, Oxford
12 Passingham, R.E. (1993) The Frontal Lobes and Voluntary Action,
13 Jones, E.G. and Powell, T.P.S. (1970) An anatomical study of
converging sensory pathways within the cerebral cortex of the monkey.
14 Pandya, D.N. and Yeterian, E.H. (1985) Architecture and connections
of cortical association areas. In Cerebral Cortex (Vol. 4) (Peters, A. and
Jones, E.G., eds), pp. 3 – 61, Plenum Press
15 Cavada, C. and Goldman-Rakic, P.S. (1989) Posterior parietal cortex in
rhesus monkey: II. Evidence for segregated corticocortical networks
linking sensory and limbic areas with the frontal lobe. J. Comp.
16 Bates, J.F. and Goldman-Rakic, P.S. (1993) Prefrontal connections of
medial motor areas in the rhesus monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 336,
17 Luppino, G. et al. (1993) Corticocortical connections of area F3 (SMAproper) and area F6 (Pre-SMA) in the macaque monkey. J. Comp.
18 Morecraft, R.J. and Van Hoesen, G.W. (1993) Frontal granular cortex
input to the cingulate (M3), supplementary (M2) and primary (M1)
motor cortices in the rhesus monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 337, 669 – 689
19 Fuster, J.M. et al. (2000) Cross-modal and cross-temporal association
in neurons of frontal cortex. Nature 405, 347– 351
1364-6613/$ - see front matter q 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
To what degree is executive conflict resolution dependent on conflict awareness? A recent study by Dehaene
et al. compared neural responses to conflict elicited
through either visible or subliminal primes. Despite
behavioral conflict effects for both prime types, neural
activity in a control network including the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was present only for visible primes.
Along with other recent results, these findings have
important implications for theories on the relationship
between ACC, consciousness, and cognitive control.
What is consciousness for? An important step towards
an empirical answer to this question would be the
Corresponding author: Ulrich Mayr (mayr@darkwing.uoregon.edu).
establishment of precise boundaries between neurocognitive functions that can run outside of awareness, and
functions that require consciousness as a necessary
condition. The search for such boundaries should be
particularly promising at the lines that delineate those
operations that monitor and regulate ongoing processing
in a goal-directed manner (often subsumed under the label
‘executive control’) from those domain-specific and often
routine activities that execute the actual, task-specific
computations. If has been often noted that we usually
become aware of those aspects in the internal or external
world that interfere or interrupt routine action – which
are very same events that typically elicit executive control
operations [1]. Interestingly, in recent biologically
plausible network simulations, both consciousness and
All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate, letting you access and read them immediately.
