This article was downloaded by: [University of Innsbruck]
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 912307195]
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
International Journal of Production Research
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713696255
An explicit analysis of the lead time syndrome: stability condition and
Bari Selçuk a; Ivo J. B. F. Adan b; Ton G. de Kok a; Jan C. Fransoo a
Department of Technology Management, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands b
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The
To cite this Article Selçuk, Bari, Adan, Ivo J. B. F., de Kok, Ton G. and Fransoo, Jan C.(2009)'An explicit analysis of the lead time
syndrome: stability condition and performance evaluation',International Journal of Production Research,47:9,2507 — 2529
To link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/00207540701420552
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207540701420552
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
International Journal of Production Research
An explicit analysis of the lead time syndrome: stability condition
Baris Selçuka*, Ivo J.B.F. Adanb, Ton G. de Koka and Jan C. Fransooa
Department of Technology Management, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands; bDepartment of Mathematics and Computer Science, Technische
Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Updating planned lead times in response to changing workload levels leads to
erratic ordering behaviour, resulting in even larger variability in the workload
levels and flow times. This phenomenon is called lead time syndrome, and
describes the cyclic interaction between adaptive planned lead times and order
sizes. Although it has been conceptually defined and intuitively accepted, formal
analysis with analytical evaluation of the phenomenon has not been conducted.
The objective of this paper is to provide a stronger understanding of the lead time
syndrome, and to give new insights into the effects of frequently updating planned
lead times. We develop a two-dimensional Markov process to model a single-item
production process with orders released sensitive to the planned lead time. Using
matrix-geometric methods, analytical results on the utilization level and the
variability in the system are presented in relation to the frequency of updating
the planned lead time. Although the average utilization level is always retained,
the lead time syndrome causes an increase in the average workload level and the
actual flow times of the completed orders. The variability of the planned lead time
increases with the update frequency except at the utilization boundaries, where
the relative effect of the update frequency diminishes.
Keywords: lead time setting; order release; quasi-birth-and-death processes;
Planned lead time is one of the key modeling parameters in the planning and control of
multi-stage production–distribution systems. It refers to the estimated/planned duration of
time that elapses between the release time of an order and the time that the order is
completed and made available to customers or down-stream production stages. Setting the
correct planned lead times that fit the associated production–distribution systems has been
of concern both in academia and industry for decades. This is due to the fact that planned
lead time is a fixed parameter that refers to a dynamic and uncertain frame on a
The research on lead time management can be classified into three related lines:
(1) workload control to satisfy fixed planned lead times, (2) due-date assignment
associated with the existence of internal due-dates, and (3) setting planned lead times for
time-phased order releases in a Material Requirements Planning (MRP) context. Workload
*Corresponding author. Email: b.selcuk@tm.tue.nl
ISSN 0020–7543 print/ISSN 1366–588X online
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
control is a means of stabilizing the flow times based on the intuition derived from Little’s
law, and it is related to orders to be loaded to the shop or not. Due-date assignment is
complementary to workload control, since it is related to the scheduling of the orders that
are loaded. MRP can be considered as an order release mechanism that aims to satisfy
forecasted demand, and provides inputs for the control of the workload at specific workcentres and assignment of due-dates to specific orders. The planned lead time in this case is
used to fine-tune the inventory position with demand forecasts. In this paper, we consider
modeling and evaluating the situation with dynamic planned lead times.
The due-date assignment literature provides us with numerous techniques for setting
the planned lead times dynamically. The most popular utilize the order characteristics
together with dynamic shop load information. Examples include Total Work Content
(TWK)—the planned lead time of an order is set in proportion to the total processing time
of the order (Conway et al. 1967, Kanet 1986)—and Jobs in Queue (JIQ)—the flow time of
an order is estimated based on a proportion of the total number of orders in queue on its
routing (Chang 1994). The majority of the studies in this line are conducted in a produceto-order job-shop environment concentrating on service-related performance measures
such as the average length of the planned lead time, tardiness, earliness, etc. One of the
fundamental assumptions is that the order characteristics are determined externally and
independently from the planned lead time, which generally holds true for engineer-toorder situations. However, in batch processing industries, for example, where the orders
are released and processed in batches of production items, the orders are generally released
according to some anticipated knowledge of the total demand levels during the planned
lead times. In a multi-stage production–inventory system, one would expect that the
planned lead times are used for coordination purposes between stages.
Fixed planned lead times have been widely accepted in an MRP context. The concept
of fixed planned lead times is further developed by De Kok and Franso (2003), and by
Spitter et al. (2005) within the context of planning supply chain operations with capacity
constraints. Fixed planned lead times have also been commonly used in various make-tostock settings (e.g., Karaesmen et al. (2002) and Liberopoulos and Koukoumialos (2005)).
Most of the studies on setting planned lead times for MRP systems approach the problem
from a static view, and strive to find fixed planned lead times that best fit the planned
situation (e.g., Yano (1987), Molinder (1997) and Enns (2001)). Hoyt (1978) was the first
to criticize fixed planned lead times, and argued that planned lead times should be
dynamic, in the sense that they reflect the dynamic operational characteristics of a
production process, in particular by looking at the average queue length and the average
output realized. This discussion was further enhanced by Kanet in a series of papers; he
first investigated the various effects that planned lead times have on a multi-stage
production–inventory system (Kanet 1982), then he emphasized the favourable results in
terms of order tardiness achieved by the TWK rule (Kanet 1986). Since then, the research
on dynamic planned lead times for supply chain situations has not attracted much
attention. The state-of-the-art on this topic models the dynamic planned lead times from
the perspective of job-shop scheduling, where the job-arrival patterns are derived from an
MRP explosion process (e.g., Zijm and Buitenhek (1996) and Lambrecht et al. (1998)). The
available techniques have been shown to give a considerable improvement over fixed
planned lead times (see Vandaele et al. (2000) for a case study). Additionally, Homem-deMello et al. (1999) presents a method for setting release times for jobs in a stochastic
production flow line. However, these studies do not consider the effect of dynamic planned
lead times on the order generating process. Recently, Enns and Suwanruji (2004)
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
International Journal of Production Research
investigated the use of exponentially smoothed planned lead times, and showed the
sensitivity of the system to safety lead time factors and lot-sizing choices. Selçuk et al.
(2006) also used exponentially smoothed planned lead times for a capacitated multi-stage
make-to-stock system and identified the conditions that generate erratic order
The variability introduced by frequent updates of planned lead times has been
discussed by various researchers and is generally denoted as the lead time syndrome
(Mather and Plossl 1978). It is argued that closing the gap between planned lead times and
actual flow times by updating the planned lead times results in uncontrolled order release
patterns. As the planned lead times become larger, orders must be released earlier, queues
become longer and flow times become longer, which again causes larger planned lead
times. This results from the fact that, while releasing the orders, the relationship between
workload and flow times is ignored. The general consensus is that the lead time syndrome
causes instability, and must be avoided. This reasoning has become one of the main
arguments for controlling manufacturing flow times within the predetermined norms
instead of forecasting them (e.g., Tatsiopoulos and Kingsman (1983), Plossl (1988),
Kingsman et al. (1989), Zäpfel and Missbauer (1993), and Breithaupt et al. (2002)). The
mean and the variability of the time that an order spends on the shop floor can be reduced
significantly by workload control. However, the total order flow time as seen from an
order release perspective may still possess a high level of variability.
Consequently, there are a number of opportunities for a continuing discussion on
dynamic planned lead times in different contexts. In this paper, we aim to shed some
formal light on this discussion by emphasizing the variability introduced by the lead time
syndrome. We argue that an explicit analysis of the phenomenon is needed to propose
The lead time syndrome is becoming increasingly relevant due to the opportunity of
frequent information exchange enabled by recent advances in data processing and storage
technologies. Ubiquitous information such as inventory levels, work-in-process, and shop
conditions at various stages of the supply chain may be available continuously to update
planning parameters. An important question is to what extent all this information should
be used to update plans and planning parameters. Insights based on the lead time
syndrome would suggest making limited use of these updating capabilities due to the
increased variability in the order release in response to the operational changes. Let us
describe the lead time syndrome using an example.
1.1 Lead time syndrome: an example from MRP
Consider a producer of a single item and a downstream stock point where orders are
released based on the MRP logic. tables 1–3 provide the changes in the planned order
releases depending on how the lead time changes. Gross requirements refer to the
anticipated future independent/dependent demand for the item during each period.
Scheduled receipts are the total quantity of items released previously and scheduled to be
replenished by the end of each period. Projected available balance indicates the current
and future anticipated inventory level for the item at the end of each period. Assume that
in period 1 the planned lead time is set to two periods. The plan for the order releases in
this case is given in Table 1. To keep it simple the gross requirements are expressed in
terms of the lot size, which is equal to d in our example. In period 1 and with a planned
Table 1. MRP record in period 1, planned lead time two periods.
Table 2. MRP record in period 2, planned lead time three periods.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Table 3. MRP record in period 2, planned lead time one period.
lead time of two periods, orders of sizes d are planned to be released at the start of periods
Assume that due to temporary deviations in production the scheduled order to be
received within period 1 cannot be finished, which causes the orders in the pipeline to be
delayed for one period. Then, in order to be realistic, the planned lead time is increased to
three periods at the start of period 2. As given in Table 2, the previously planned order of
size d at the start of period 2 is now changed to 2d due to the increase in the planned lead
On the other hand, it may well be the case that production occurs faster than
anticipated and the released order of period 1 is finished within period 1. Considering this
unexpected decrease in the workload the planned lead time is decreased to one period and,
consequently, the previously planned order of size d for period 2 is now canceled.
Our analysis in Tables 1–3 is also in line with the fact that MRP systems are equivalent
to somewhat generalized base-stock systems, with the key difference being that MRP
systems make decisions at each level using an echelon target stock that includes a forecast
of future final demand. A detailed analysis of the equivalence of MRP and base-stock
systems can be found in Lambrecht et al. (1984) and Buzacott et al. (1992). In Tables 1–3,
one can easily check that the base-stock level is equal to d  (planned lead time þ 1). One
should also note that the effect of updating the planned lead time is only transient (only
the order of period 2 is affected) under the assumption that the planned lead time is going
to be fixed in the future. The lead time syndrome is then realized when we repeatedly
An illustration of the lead time syndrome is provided in Table 4 for a duration of 12
time periods. The demand is deterministic with a fixed level of d units/period, and the
International Journal of Production Research
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
periodic production may vary by an expected quantity of d units/period. In each time
period the following sequence of events occurs: the planned lead time is set according to
the total workload divided by the expected production quantity, the order for that period
is released, produced items are delivered to the stock point, and demand is realized. The
initial planned lead time is two periods with a total workload of 2d.
A standard order of size d is placed in period 1. In period 2, production cannot occur
due to a temporary breakdown, and the total workload increases to 3d units. Therefore,
the planned lead time is increased to three periods. The order in period 3 now includes the
static case order plus an additional period’s demand, thereby increasing the total workload
to 4d units. As a result, the planned lead time is increased to four periods, and in period 4
an order of size 2d is again placed. The vicious cycle continues, and in period 6 the planned
lead time is increased to six periods, and the workload to 6d units. In this period, 2d units
are produced due to faster production. Thus, the planned lead time is not changed in
period 7, and a static order of size d is placed. Production increases in period 7, reducing
the workload to 5d units and the planned lead time to five periods in period 8. The new
order now includes the static order minus the excess of one period demand, which results
in cancelation of the static order. This causes a further decrease in the workload and
therefore in the planned lead time. The cyclic effect continues and in week 11 the planned
One can see from Table 4 that the deviation in the production quantities is amplified
and carried through the workload levels by erratic order releases caused by updating the
planned lead time. This behaviour seems quite arbitrary for a rational planner, but the
phenomenon is generally considered to be a relevant problem in real-life decision-support
systems (IBM 1972), and also within the industrial dynamics of Forrester (1980).
In this paper we concentrate our analysis on the production process, specifically the
workload level, utilization and the flow time of orders. From the perspective of the
production department the orders are generated externally by an inventory planner, which
may be a MRP, base-stock or similar system. We model the production process as a singleserver queue with continuous arrival and processing of production orders. A twodimensional Markov process is developed for this purpose, and using matrix-geometric
methods we tackle the following research questions.
. How does the lead time syndrome affect the stability of the production process?
. What is the effect of the update frequency on the performance of the production
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section 2 we describe the essential features of the
problem setting, and the lead time setting procedure. We then describe the Markov
process, its solution and the stability condition. Then, in section 4 we provide the
performance evaluation results in relation to the update frequency. Finally, section 5
provides the contributions and conclusions of this study with further research directions.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
We model a production department facing a stochastic arrival of production orders. Under
static conditions, orders of a single lot-size are placed according to a Poisson process with
rate . Due to the dynamic planned lead time, orders can be released in an integer number of
lot-sizes. A change in the planned lead time may yield additional lots to be released for
production or some lots to be canceled. During the rest of this paper, each production lot is
referred to as a single job in the queueing system. w denotes the number of jobs being
processed (WIP) in the shop, and the total workload is ŵ ¼ w þ b, where b is the number of
jobs waiting in the production backlog to be loaded to the shop floor. There is a WIP limit,
W0, that indicates the size and the speed of the shop floor with respect to a single job. The
shop is assumed to handle at most W0 jobs at the same time, and when the shop is totally
loaded, arriving jobs are put in the backlog queue, and loaded to the shop each time a job is
completed and leaves the shop. The backlog queue is modeled as a single-server system with
FCFS processing discipline. The WIP in the shop is processed within exponentially
distributed time intervals with rate  jobs/time unit. An illustration of our queueing system
is given in Figure 1. The following examples may further clarify the situation.
Example 2.1: The shop has a single machine that operates with exponentially distributed
processing times with rate . There is a buffer in front of the machine that can store at
Example 2.2: The shop has multiple manufacturing centres. Jobs can follow different
routes in the shop. The possibility that different jobs interfere (setups, processor sharing,
etc.) with each other depends on the WIP level in the shop. Each job is processed fast when
the WIP level is low and vice versa. Jobs are processed in parallel with independent,
identically distributed exponential processing times with rate /WIP. Since the minimum
of the exponentials is also exponential with a rate equal to the sum of the rates, the overall
processing rate is  irrespective of the WIP level in the shop.
Figure 1. A single-server queueing system with adaptive planned lead time.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
International Journal of Production Research
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the production department and the
inventory planner. The flow of information is represented by dashed lines, and the solid
lines refer to the physical flow of jobs. The inventory planner is responsible for
determining the number of jobs released or the number of jobs suspended from the
backlog queue. The production department continuously reviews the workload status and
quotes a planned lead time to the inventory planner.
The planned lead time is determined based on the expected flow time of the last job
currently residing in the backlog. When the backlog queue is empty, w^  W0 , the lead time
is set to a fixed level, L0, referring to the minimum estimated flow time. When there are
jobs waiting in the backlog, then an estimate of the waiting time in the backlog is added to
L0. From the memoryless property of the exponential processing times it is straightforward
that, at any point in time, the expected duration of time to finish b jobs through the
production process is b/. Here, the planned lead time is determined based on a logic
similar to those procedures that have previously been applied in the literature, such as
TWK and JIQ (Kanet 1986, Chang 1994). The estimated waiting time is set by a
management constant multiplied by the term b/. Since  is constant, without loss of
generality we can write the planned lead time as a function of the total workload level:
where  is a management constant and the planned lead time is an integer. In other words,
the planned lead time is based on the production department’s perception of the range of
the number of jobs that can be finished in a certain time frame. Implicitly,  refers to the
update frequency. For greater , the lead time is updated more frequently, and for smaller
, the lead time is updated less frequently. We define the reciprocal of the update
frequency, r ¼ 1 / , as the increase or decrease in the number of jobs in the backlog, b, in
order to have one unit of increase or decrease in the planned lead time, respectively.
In a realistic setting, although the planning process is a very complex task including
human intervention, the underlying relationship as described in section 1 still remains valid.
Depending on the situation, the degree of response to the change in the planned lead time
may vary but, generally, depends on the traffic intensity through a decision function h().
When the planned lead time is fixed, orders of standard size are given with rate . When the
lead time is increased, an amount h() is added to the standard order, and when there is a
decrease in the planned lead time, an excess h() is canceled from the production backlog.
From the perspective of the production department, jobs are canceled. From the systems
perspective, jobs do not disappear, but are suspended from the production backlog until the
time new jobs are released. From the base-stock policy (Base-stock ¼ L  ), one may expect
that h() ¼ . However, due to various factors in the planning process, the response can be
different. For example, the planner may anticipate an increase/decrease trend in the
planned lead time and over-react by setting h() 4 . On the other hand, the planner may
react to dampen the variability, and smooth the production orders by setting h() 5 . In
this study, for modeling purposes we apply h() ¼ 1.
^ and b(t) as the total number of jobs in the system and the number of jobs in the
backlog at time t, respectively. We model this queueing system as a two-dimensional
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Figure 2. Transition rate diagram for the process {X4(t), t  0}.
Markov process defined by {Xr(t), t  0}, Xr ðtÞ ¼ ðwðtÞ;
is the planned lead time defined by the update parameter r. We use r as a subscript because
it determines the characteristics of the process. When b(t) ¼ r  (Lr(t)  L0) þ r  1, an
arrival triggers an increase in the planned lead time and an additional job is ordered
immediately. When b(t) ¼ r  (Lr(t)  L0), a departure triggers a decrease in the planned
lead time and a job is canceled immediately. As long as b(t) remains in between, the system
behaves as an ordinary M jMj 1. An illustration of the process {Xr(t), t  0} with r ¼ 4 is
The process has a quasi-birth-and-death (QBD) structure in the diagonal direction of
Lr ðtÞÞ coordinates. For clearness of presentation, we transform the state space of
the process {Xr(t), t  0} into the standard QBD format. The new process is defined by
{Yr(t), t  0}, Yr ðtÞ ¼ ðL^ r ðtÞ; b^r ðtÞÞ, where L^ r ðtÞ ¼ Lr ðtÞ  L0 and b^r ðtÞ ¼ wðtÞ
The state space of the process {Y r(t), t  0} can be partitioned into the set of boundary
states {(0, W0),(0, W0 þ 1) , . . . , (0, 2),(0, 1)} and levels l, where level l is the set of
states {(l,0),(l,1), . . . , (l,r  2),(l,r  1)}, l ¼ 0, 1, . . . ; the transition rate diagram for the
process {Y4(t), t  0} is shown in Figure 3. Note that (0, W0) corresponds to the empty
Throughout the rest of the paper we will concentrate on the explicit solution of the
QBD process {Yr(t), t  0}. As can be seen in Figure 3, for every r ¼ 2, 3, . . . , the right drift
occurs from state (l, r  1) to (l þ 1, 1), and the left drift occurs from state (l þ 1, 0) to
(l, r  2), l ¼ 0, 1, . . . . To conveniently describe the infinitesimal generator Q(r) of the
process, {Yr(t), t  0}, we will employ the following notation for square matrices with
arbitrary dimension k 4 0. We will denote the identity matrix by I (k), and the right and left
R and T L , respectively. Therefore, ðT R Þi;j ¼ iþ1;j and ðT L Þiþ1;j ¼ i;j
for i, j ¼ 0, 1, . . . , k1, where i,j denotes the Kronecker delta. Further, we define the kdimensional unit column-vector on the jth coordinate by eðkÞ
the states are in lexicographic order, the generator Q(r) is
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
International Journal of Production Research
Figure 3. Transition rate diagram for the process {Y4(t), t  0}.
Q(r) is partitioned into matrices that provide the transition rates between and within the
0 is the transition rate matrix from level l to level l þ 1, and
rates within level l, l ¼ 0, 1, . . . , . AðrÞ
matrix from level l to level l  1, l ¼ 1, 2, . . . , . Further, Z 0ðW0 rÞ , ZðW
transition rate matrices from, within and to the set of boundary states. We represent these
Theoretically, for W0 ! 1 the planned lead time is never updated, and the stability
condition is / 5 1. This is the case where the production department is assumed to have
an infinite capacity relative to the size of the orders such that the delivery time is always
kept at the level of the minimum flow time independent of the workload level. This is a
common assumption in classical inventory control theory. The same stability condition
also holds for r ! 1, which also yields a fixed planned lead time. Throughout the rest of
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Figure 4. Transition rate diagram for the Markov process with generator A(r).
This is the utilization of the production department in a static system.
For finite r and finite W0, the stability condition of the QBD process, {Yr(t), t  0}, can
be derived from Neuts’ mean drift condition (Neuts 1981). The Markov process defined by
the generator Q(r) is ergodic (stable) if and only if
where e(r) is an r-dimensional column vector of ones, and ðrÞ ¼ ððrÞ
steady-state probability vector of the Markov process with generator
where 0(r) is an r-dimensional row vector of zeros.
Condition (1) has an intuitive interpretation. The generator A(r) describes the
behaviour of the QBD process {Yr(t), t  0} in the (vertical) b^r ðtÞ direction. Weighted by
the steady-state probabilities in the vertical direction, if the mean drift to the left,
2 e , is greater than the mean drift to the right,  A0 e , then the process is stable.
In order to explicitly determine stability condition (2) for every update parameter r, we
need to have a detailed look at the Markov process defined by the generator A(r). It has r
states, and its transition rate diagram is given in Figure 4. By utilizing the global balance
principle, we can derive a relationship between the probabilities ðrÞ
implies that condition (2) always reduces to  5 1. This is summarized in Theorem 3.1.
Theorem 3.1: For every update parameter r ¼ 2, 3, . . . , the Markov process defined
by {Yr(t), t  0} is stable if and only if
Our findings in this section lead to the interesting conclusion that the stability
condition of the system is independent of whether or not the lead time is updated. If the
system is stable under the static policy that employs a fixed planned lead time, we will not
see increasing uncontrollable congestion once we start to update the planned lead time in
International Journal of Production Research
response to a changing workload level. The stability is always satisfied for all update
frequencies. An intuitive explanation is that the increase in the total workload due to
placing additional jobs in response to an increase in the planned lead time is balanced by
the decrease in the total workload due to canceling jobs in response to a decrease in the
planned lead time. The frequency of updating the planned lead time varies depending on
the choice of the update parameter r ( ¼ 1/r), but the rates of job addition and job
cancelation stay balanced in the long run, therefore stability is retained.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
For the derivations performed in the rest of the paper we assume the queuing system is
stable, that is  5 1. Let pðrÞ ðl; jÞ be the steady-state probability that the QBD process
{Yr(t), t  0} is in state (l, j). From the equilibrium equations for the boundary states, we
l denote the vector of equilibrium probabilities for level l. Therefore,
l ¼ ðp ðl; 0Þ; p ðl; 1Þ; . . . ; p ðl; r  2Þ; p ðl; r  1ÞÞ;
The equilibrium equations for level l are
Note that we have eliminated the boundary probability p(r)(0, 1) in equation (1) by
substituting the expression in equation (4). The normalization equation is
which, by substituting equation (4), reduces to
Given that the Markov process with generator Q(r) is ergodic, the equilibrium
probability vectors are determined by deploying the matrix-geometric form,
where the r-dimensional rate matrix R(r) is the minimal non-negative solution of the
Matrix geometric methods, initiated by Neuts (1981), serve as a powerful framework
for analysing and (approximately) solving large classes of stochastic processes of GjMj1
type in a unified manner. In order to solve for the steady-state properties of the process,
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
one should determine the rate matrix R(r) that solves equation (9). The problem of finding
an explicit rate matrix is still a developing research area. Structural results have been
provided by Ramaswami and Latouche (1986) for QBD processes with transition matrices
of rank 1. Van Leeuwaarden and Winands (2005) describe a class of QBD processes for
which an explicit rate matrix can be found. Based on the results of Ramaswami and
Latouche (1986), we provide an explicit solution for the rate matrix R(r) of the QBD
process {Yr(t), t  0} for every update parameter, r.
Theorem 3.2: Given that the Markov process with generator Q(r) is ergodic, the rate matrix
R(r) that exactly solves the matrix quadratic equation (9) for every r ¼ 2, 3, . . . is given by
In order to determine the steady-state distribution of {Yr(t), t  0} we need to derive pðrÞ
from equilibrium equation (5) and normalization equation (7). Using the explicit
expression for the rate matrix and the matrix geometric form (8), equilibrium equation
Solving this system of linear equations we obtain
p(r)(0, 0) from the normalization equation (7). First, let us rewrite
the term l¼0 pl e by substituting (8), which is going to simplify the solution,
Since the rate matrix R(r) has rows of zero, except for the last one, the power matrices
International Journal of Production Research
The stability of the QBD process {Yr(t), t  0} directly implies (R(r))r1,r1 ¼ r1 5 1. This
can also be verified by the fact that, if {Yr(t), t  0} is stable, then the largest eigenvalue of
the rate matrix R(r) is less than 1 (Theorem 1.7.1 of Neuts (1981)). The lower diagonal
structure of R(r) directly implies that the largest eigenvalue is (R(r))r1,r1. Hence,
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
is an r-dimensional column vector of ones, except that the last row is equal to
Employing the explicit expression for RðrÞ
This result, together with our findings in equations (12) and (13) to represent pðrÞ
Then, using this result in the normalization equation and solving the normalization
which directly implies that the probability of an empty system is given by
As a direct conclusion of equation (17), the utilization of the system is found to be
insensitive to the lead time update and is always equal to . This is in line with our findings
on the stability condition of the system. It reveals the fact that updating the planned lead
time does not increase or decrease the long-run average traffic intensity in the system. The
rate at which the jobs are loaded to the shop is the same as in the static case.
In this section we answer our second research question by investigating the effect of the
update frequency on the performance of the production department. The key performance
indicators are related to the cost performance, the delivery performance, and the
nervousness created in the planning system. To avoid intricacy in the notation and the
analysis, it should be noted that the parameter r refers to the reciprocal of the update
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
We have shown in the previous section that the dynamic and static utilization levels are
equal. Therefore, keeping a large number of jobs as workload introduces inefficiency, and
increased costs are incurred due to, for example, material handling and inventory holding.
Maintaining a utilization level of  implies that the average number of jobs in process is
the same both in the static and dynamic situation. Thus, our attention is on the average
number of jobs in the backlog. Let B (r) denote the random variable for the backlog level
The larger the backlog level, the higher the costs that the production unit has to face.
Using the explicit derivations provided in the previous section we formulate the
relationship between the static and dynamic case average backlog levels in the following
Proposition 4.1: The average number of jobs in the production backlog of a dynamic system
is always larger than it is under a static system, and their relationship is given by
where the average backlog level under the static situation is E ½Bð1Þ ¼ W0 þ1 =ð1  Þ, and
is a monotonically increasing function of the update frequency  ¼ 1/r for r=2, 3, . . . .
Proposition 4.1 has an intuitively appealing interpretation. We see that updating the
planned lead time increases the long-term average backlog level by a multiplicative term,
which is a function of the utilization level and the update frequency. We call this term the
lead-time-update effect, and denote it by (, r). When the planned lead time is increased,
additional jobs are released, increasing the backlog level until the planned lead time is
decreased. On average, this results in a higher average backlog level, although the uilization
of the production department does not change. It is a fundamental intuition from Hopp and
Spearman (2000) that an inefficient increase in congestion is undesirable due to the increase
in order processing, material handling and inventory holding costs. The monotonicity of
(, r) implies that the fixed planned lead time policy yields the lowest cost situation. As the
production department becomes more sensitive to changes in its workload level by more
frequent updating of the planned lead time, more workload is generated.
Figure 5 illustrates the level of increase in the average number of jobs in the backlog as
a function of utilization for different update frequencies. For the highest update frequency,
 ¼ 1/2, and utilization level close to 1, the backlog level is twice as much as it is when the
planned lead time is fixed. As the update frequency decreases, the deteriorating effect
significantly decreases. The lead-time-update effect is relatively small for low utilization
levels, and increases as the utilization increases.
International Journal of Production Research
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Figure 5. The lead-time-update effect, (, r); 0 5  51 and r ¼ 1/,  ¼ 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5.
In addition, the delivery performance of the jobs is evaluated by considering the actual
duration that the processed jobs spend between the moment that they are released and the
moment that they are completed. The random variable for the job flow time is denoted by
C (r), and it is the flow time of a finished job (not canceled). As the average workload level
increases in the dynamic case, we would also expect to see, on average, longer flow times.
The result we have found is even stronger, as provided in the following Proposition.
Proposition 4.2: Given that only the last job in the backlog queue can be canceled, the flow
time of a processed job in the dynamic situation is stochastically greater than or equal to the
flow time of a job in the static situation
where C(1) denotes the random variable for the flow time of a job in the static situation
This result is related to the increased variability in the release pattern of jobs created by
updating the planned lead time. When the planned lead time is updated, jobs are released
earlier than they would be under the static case. Some of the jobs are canceled. However,
the net input rate does not differ from the static case, and, on average, jobs spend more
time in the system, causing worse delivery performance of the production department.
Further, Proposition 4.2 directly implies that a certain (e.g. 90th) percentile of the flow
time distribution of the completed jobs in the dynamic case is greater than or equal to that
in the static case. Thus, the service level in terms of the percentage of jobs completed in a
certain time frame will never improve once the production department starts to quote
In addition to the actual flow time, it is also important to analyse the mean and the
variability of the planned lead time. From the perspective of the inventory planner, a very
long and a highly variable lead time is undesirable. A long lead time increases the
uncertainty, and an erratic lead time increases both the variability in inventory and the
nervousness in the planning decisions. Let L (r) denote the random variable for the planned
lead time quoted by the production department, and its probability mass function is given by
The first and second moments of the distribution of the planned lead time are derived
based on the update frequency as follows.
Proposition 4.3: The first and second moments of the probability distribution of the lead
time quoted by the manufacturer are given by
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Let us denote the average increase over the minimum planned lead time due to
updating the planned lead time as L(r), which is given by
The relationship between the average number of jobs in the backlog and the average
planned lead time follows directly from equations (18) and (19). It gives an analytical
Equation (21) provides insight into the fundamental inventory replenishment
behaviour; as the estimated delivery time increases, the inventory position is increased
by larger orders, in turn generating an increased workload. As exemplified in section 1, the
longer the planned lead time becomes, the greater the production backlog. Here, we
emphasize the insight that the long-term average behaviour of a physical phenomenon
(number of jobs in the backlog) is expressed in terms of the long-term average behaviour of
a dynamic planning parameter (planned lead time) and a coefficient determined by its
The coefficient of variation of the planned lead time CV[L(r)] follows from equations
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
The lead time distribution depends on the design variables, including L0,W0 and r. For
a specific situation with L0 ¼ 1 and W0 ¼ 1, CV[L(r)] is depicted as a function of the
utilization level for different update frequencies in Figure 6. Starting from zero for a
utilization level close to zero, the coefficient of variation of the planned
as the utilization increases, and asymptotically approaches
For a given utilization level, CV[L(r)] increases as the update frequency increases.
However, the relative effect of the update frequency depends on the utilization level. The
update frequency is more influential for moderate values of , i.e. 0.5    0.8. The effect
diminishes at the utilization boundaries. For a utilization level close to zero it is trivial that
International Journal of Production Research
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Figure 6. Coefficient of variation of the lead time, CV[L(r)]; 0 5  5 1 and r ¼ 1/,  ¼ 1/2, 1/
there will be no variation. For a utilization level close to 1, the marginal effect of the
update frequency diminishes since the system inherently possesses very high variability. As
a result, for moderate levels of utilization, the planned lead time should be updated less
frequently in order to decrease the nervousness in planning decisions.
We have modeled a situation known as the lead time syndrome in the literature. Our study
was motivated by a lack of analytical analysis for production–inventory systems utilizing
dynamic, adaptive planned lead times based on the workload status. We have provided
insightful results concerning the stability condition and the performance evaluation of
systems with adaptive planned lead times. We are aware of the fact that the results depend
on the specific policy by which the planned lead time is updated, and the planner’s
response to changes in the planned lead time. At the same time we believe that our
problem setting is realistic in the sense that it describes the phenomenon, and the type of
behaviour described in this paper can be experienced with common planning tools such as
MRP, linear programming or base-stock policies. In this study, for a stationary demand
and a stationary production process, we have shown the following.
. Production planning systems utilizing dynamic load-dependent planned lead
times can be modeled through a two-dimensional Markov process and solved
explicitly using matrix geometric analysis.
. The stability condition and utilization level are independent of whether or not the
. When the planned lead time is updated in response to a changing workload level,
the average number of jobs waiting in the production backlog increases by a
multiplicative term, which is larger for a higher utilization level and higher update
. Although the utilization does not change, due to the increased variability in the
workload, the flow time of the processed jobs increases as the lead time is
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
. The variability of the planned lead time increases with the update frequency, with
the exception that the effect diminishes at utilization boundaries.
The analysis and results provided in this study promote further improvements in modeling
and analysing dynamic, adaptive systems. The strength of our analysis lies in the modeling
of the update frequency, which is an important design parameter for dynamic, adaptive
planning tools. The update frequency is related to the sensitivity of the production
department to changes in the workload status. There is also the response of the inventory
planner, modeled by h(), which is related to the degree that the inventory planner is
sensitive to changes in the planned lead time. In this respect, it would be an interesting
extension to consider alternative strategies in setting h() and to evaluate the joint effect of
h() and the update frequency. It would also be interesting to extend the analysis by
considering multiple stages of the supply chain.
Our results in the previous section imply that, under stationary conditions, the fixed
planned lead time policy is preferable. However, it is unclear what the best policy would be
when the demand pattern is non-stationary. In that case, new policies may need to be
developed (Selçuk et al. 2007). The analysis for non-stationary demand or production
conditions is an interesting research direction.
For r ¼ 4, 5, . . . we obtain, by balancing the flow out and into the set {0, 1, . . . , k}, k ¼ 0, 1, . . . , r2,
Equations (A.1) and (A.2) together with condition (2) show that the system is stable for every
r ¼ 2, 3, . . . as long as  5 1. This completes the proof of Theorem 3.1.
We apply the results of Ramaswami and Latouche (1986) and derive explicit solutions using matrix
algebra. Given the Markov process with generator Q(r) is ergodic, the rate matrix R(r) that exactly
International Journal of Production Research
solves the matrix quadratic equation (9) is given by
describe the rate matrix in more detail. First, let us denote the
1 þ A0 e ðer2 Þ Þ by A3 . Then, R has rows of zeros except for the
last one, and we can write its last row as
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
3 are zero. The second row of ðA3 Þ , denoted by ða3ð1Þ Þ , solves the
By exploiting the tri-diagonal structure of AðrÞ
Consequently, due to equation (B.2), this derivation yields
r1 ¼ ð;  ð1 þ Þ;  ð1 þ Þ; . . . ; 
The expected number of jobs in the backlog is given by
and using the relationship we have found in equation (14), and the derivation of pðrÞ
and (13), we further simplify this equation as
Let us denote the first and second terms on the right-hand side of equation (C.1) by Br(1) and
Br(2), respectively. We first write Br(1) in its explicit form, and then write Br(2) similarly in order to
provide an explicit expression for E [B(r)]. From equations (12) and (13),
In addition, equation (15) implies that the term R(r) e(r)/(1r1) is a column vector of zeros except
that the last row is equal to 2/(1). Then, using equation (C.2) and the explicit solution for
p(r)(0, 0), provided in equation (16), we can rewrite Br(1) as
Similar derivations are performed to determine Br(2), and we rewrite it as
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Then, the average number of jobs in the backlog given in equation (C.1) can be written explicitly as
From the stability condition,  5 1, it directly follows that
which implies that the lead time update effect (, r) is monotonically increasing in the update
Together with equation (C.5) this completes the proof of Proposition 4.1.
Let us assume that the static system is initially empty and consider a realization of arrival times and
processing times of jobs; let aj denote the jth arrival time at the shop and let j denote the jth
processing time in the shop. Now we couple the static and dynamic system by assuming that the
dynamic system is also initially empty and fed by exactly the same stream of jobs; therefore, aj is the
jth (external) arrival time in the dynamic system. It is important to note that, in the dynamic system,
additional jobs may be generated at the jth arrival and additional jobs may leave (i.e. be canceled)
when a job finishes processing. Further, we assume that the processing times of the jobs are exactly
the same as in the static system, i.e. the jth processing time in the dynamic system is j.
Let w^ r ðtÞ denote the workload, i.e. the number of jobs in the dynamic system at time t; the
subscript refers to the update parameter r in the dynamic system. Similarly, w^ 1 ðtÞ denotes the
workload in the static system at time t. Now we immediately have that w^ r ðtÞ  w^ 1 ðtÞ, or, more
where L^ r ðtÞ is the quoted lead time at time t minus L0. Figure 7 shows a sample path of w^ 1 ðtÞ and
w^ r ðtÞ for r ¼ 2 and W0 ¼ 1. Note that, in both systems, processing of the jth job starts at exactly the
The claim is that, for all t  0, the jth job in the queue of the static system arrives later (or
at the same time) than the jth job in the dynamic system. The claim is immediate from
equation (D.1): an arriving job in the static system will find at most as many jobs in the queue as the
International Journal of Production Research
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Figure 7. Realization of the workload w^ 1 ðtÞ (solid line) and w^ r ðtÞ (dashed line) for r ¼ 2 and W0 ¼ 1.
corresponding job in the dynamic system. Thus, if the job in the static system is the jth in the queue,
then the jth job in the dynamic system was already present or arrived at the same time. Further, since
the job cancelation policy in the dynamic system is to only cancel the last job in the queue, the
position of both jobs in the queue will remain the same until they have been processed.
Since the flow time is the difference between the arrival and completion time, the above claim
Using the explicit derivation of the rate matrix in equations (10) and (11), and pðrÞ
rewrite the probability mass function of the lead time as follows:
 ð1  r1 Þðr1 Þl1 ; l ¼ 1; 2; . . . :
The lead time quoted by the manufacturer to its customers is L0 plus a random variable. We rewrite
L (r) in terms of its distribution characteristics as follows:
where the random variable L̃r has a geometric distribution with success probability r1,
Consequently, the average lead time is given by
Similarly, using the moments of the geometric random variable L~ r , we solve for the second moment
Together with equation (E.1) this completes the proof of Proposition 4.3.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
Breithaupt, J.W., Land, M., and Nyhuis, P., 2002. The workload control concept: theory and
practical extensions of load oriented order release. Production Planning & Control, 13,
Buzacott, J.A., Price, S.M., and Shanthikumar, J.G., 1992. Service level in multistage MRP and base
stock controlled production systems, In: G. Fandel, T. Gulledge and A. Jones, eds. New
directions for operations research in manufacturing. Berlin: Springer, 445–463.
Chang, F.C.R., 1994. A study of factors affecting due-date predictability in a simulated dynamic job
shop. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 13, 389–406.
Conway, R.W., Maxwell, W.L., and Miller, L.W., 1967. Theory of scheduling. London: AddisonWesley.
De Kok, A.G. and Fransoo, J.C., 2003. Planning supply chain operations: definition and
comparison of planning concepts, In: A.G. De Kok and S.C. Graves, eds. Handbook in
operations research and management science, vol. 11: design and analysis of supply chains.
Enns, S.T., 2001. MRP performance effects due to lot size and planned lead time settings.
International Journal of Production Research, 39, 461–480.
Enns, S.T. and Suwanruji, P., 2004. Workload responsive adjustment of planned lead times. Journal
of Manufacturing Technology and Management, 15, 90–100.
Forrester, J.W., 1980. Industrial dynamics. 10th ed. MIT Press.
Homem-de-Mello, T., Shapiro, A., and Spearman, M.L., 1999. Finding optimal material release
times using simulation-based optimization. Management Science, 45, 86–102.
Hopp, W.J. and Spearman, M.L., 2000. Factory physics foundations of manufacturing
management. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hoyt, J., 1978. Dynamic lead times that fit today’s dynamic planning (Q.U.O.A.T. lead times).
IBM, Manufacturing activity planning, 1972. Communications oriented production information and
control system. Vol. 5, NY: IBM: White Plains.
Kanet, J.J., 1982. Towards understanding lead times in MRP systems, Product Inventory
Kanet, J.J., 1986. Towards a better understanding of lead times in MRP systems. Journal of
Karaesmen, F., Buzacott, J.A., and Dallery, Y., 2002. Integrating advance order information in
make-to-stock production. IIE Transactions, 34, 649–662.
Kingsman, B.G., Tatsiopoulos, I.P., and Hendry, L.C., 1989. A structured methodology for
managing manufacturing lead times in make-to-order companies. European Journal of
Lambrecht, M.R., Muckstadt, J.A., and Luyten, R., 1984. Protective stocks in multi-stage
production systems. International Journal of Production Research, 22, 1001–1025.
Lambrecht, M.R., Ivens, P.L., and Vandaele, N.J., 1998. ACLIPS: a capacity and lead time
integrated procedure for scheduling. Management Science, 44, 1548–1561.
Downloaded By: [University of Innsbruck] At: 09:40 16 October 2009
International Journal of Production Research
Liberopoulos, G. and Koukoumialos, S., 2005. Tradeoffs between base stock levels, numbers of
kanbans and production lead times in production—inventory systems with advance demand
information. International Journal of Production Economics, 96, 213–232.
Mather, H. and Plossl, G.W., 1978. Priority fixation versus throughput planning. Product Inventory
Molinder, A, 1997. Joint opimization of lot-sizes, safety stocks and safety lead times in an MRP
system. International Journal of Production Research, 35, 983–994.
Neuts, M.F., 1981. Matrix-geometric solutions in stochastic models: an algorithmic approach.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Plossl, G.W., 1988. Throughput time control. International Journal of Production Research, 26,
Ramaswami, V. and Latouche, G., 1986. A general class of Markov processess with explicit matrixgeometric solutions. OR Spectrum, 8, 209–218.
Selçuk, B., Fransoo, J.C., and De Kok, A.G., 2006. The effect of updating lead times on the
performance of hierarchical planning systems. International Journal of Production Economics,
Selçuk, B., Fransoo, J.C. and De Kok A.G., 2007. Supply chain operations planning with load
dependent planned lead times, Working paper, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven,
Spitter, J.M., Hurkens, C.A.J., De Kok, A.G., Negenman, E.G., and Linstra, J.K., 2005. Linear
programming models with planned lead times. European Journal of Operational Research, 163,
Tatsiopoulos, I.P. and Kingsman, B.G., 1983. Lead time management. European Journal of
Vandaele, N.J., Lambrecht, M.R., De Schuyter, N., and Cremmery, R., 2000. Spicer off-highway
products division—brugge improves its lead-times and scheduling performance. Interfaces, 30,
Van Leeuwaarden, J.S.H. and Winands, E.M.M., 2006. Quasi-birth-and-death processes with an
explicit rate matrix. Stochastic Models, 22, 77–98.
Yano, C.A., 1987. Setting planned lead times in serial production systems with tardiness costs.
Zäpfel, G. and Missbauer, H., 1993. New concepts for production planning and conrol. European
Journal of Operational Research, 67, 297–320.
Zijm, W.H.M. and Buitenhek, R., 1996. Capacity planning and lead time management. International
Journal of Production Economics, 46/47, 165–179.
