IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS, PACKAGING, AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY—PART C, VOL. 20, NO. 4, OCTOBER 1997
and the Determination of Flow Time Control
Parameters for the Wafer Fabrication Factories
Shu-Hsing Chung, Ming-Hsien Yang, and Cho-Ming Cheng
Abstract— High work-in-process (WIP) level, long manufacturing lead time, high lead time variation, and poor due date
performance are the major problems for wafer fabrication factories. An order’s due date relates to its releasing time and flow
time. Due date performance will not be improved if WIP level
is high and material flow is unstable. Too high WIP level cannot
increase throughput but lengthen lead time. Find a suitable WIP
level and then control the material release by fixed-WIP policy
is the idea of solving the above embarrassment. In this paper,
we construct a due date assignment model (DDAM) by using
the simulation method and queuing theory. Observing the results
of simulations, the lowest system WIP level corresponding to
the desired up-time machine utilization rate of the bottleneck
resource or the capacity constraint resource (CCR) and the
shortest mean flow time can be found. To make the material
flow be stable, we also propose the methodology of determining
wafer’s WIP level, daily moves, and flow time for each product
type and for each circuitry layer; all of these can be used as
the parameters for controlling flow time. Demonstration of the
DDAM is provided with actual data. Comparing the performance
of our DDAM with other four ones, the results reveal that DDAM
performs well in each performance criterion.
Index Terms— Capacity constraint resource, circuitry layer,
due date assignment, flow time, manufacturing lead time, wafer
AFER fabrication factories usually suffer from such
problems as: high work-in-process (WIP) level, long
manufacturing lead time, high lead time variation, and poor
due date performance. High WIP level in the shop floor
causes longer manufacturing lead time. Inappropriate WIP
controlling and machine failure lead to high variation of lead
time. Consequently, the estimation of flow time is difficult and
the delivery of goods is not consistent with the due date.
Exactly assigning order’s due date and timely delivering
the goods to customer will enhance customer service. One
cannot assign accurate due date unless manufacturing lead
time can be accurately estimated. Traditionally, the estimating
of manufacturing lead time is based on the total processing
time of a process plan or past data; but the estimating error is
enormous. To avoid lately delivering, one tends to release shop
orders much earlier than necessary; the lead-time-syndrome
Manuscript received October 10, 1998. This paper was supported in part
by the National Science Council, Taiwan, R.O.C., under NSC 86-2213-E-009038.
The authors are with the Industrial Engineering and Management Department, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Publisher Item Identifier S 1083-4400(97)09333-9.
happens. Lead-time-syndrome [4] points out that uncontrolled
release of missed parts and too early releasing of materials
will increase the WIP. The effects of high level of WIP are
slowing down the material flow and lengthening lead time.
In a wafer fabrication factory, photolithography exposure
machine (wafer stepper) usually is recognized as the bottleneck resource or the capacity constraint resource (CCR). To
maximize the throughput of system, maintaining enough WIP
to raise the utilization rates of bottleneck is necessary; but
too high level of WIP will lengthen lead time. Thus, it is
important to determine the proper WIP level such that the
bottleneck is fully utilized. It is also necessary to keep the
WIP at a fixed level by the control of material releasing
and dispatching to avoid lengthening lead time. Fixed WIP
helps the stability of material flow in manufacturing system.
The stability of material flow will make the manufacturing
lead time be predictable and be less variant; the due date
Wafer’s fabrication process possesses reentry characteristics. The fabrication of wafer is layer by layer. It may be the
situation that only the former layers of each product type are
fabricated at the first half of a planning period. When the time
is elapsing and the throughput of finished goods do not meet
the requirements, most of the capacities then are allocated to
fabricate the later parts of layers of products so as to increase
system throughput. Consequently, the system throughput is
unstable, the lead time is long and variant and the WIP level
is high. Thus, it is necessary to control the daily moves for each
layer of each product type; such controlling will be useful for
maintaining the stability of system throughput and material
In this paper, we intend to study the due date assignment
problem for wafer fabrication factories. As the above analysis,
order’s due date directly relates to its releasing time and
flow time. We will plan the flow time of each product type
by considering the relationship among WIP level, capacity
utilization rate and average flow time, mentioned earlier. Using
this relationship, we can estimate the flow time of each order.
To determine the releasing time of order, the fixed total WIP
policy will be adopted. It is the time for next order being
released when some wafer lots finish their processes and leave
After assigning the due date of an order, it is also important
to control flow time to guarantee that the delivery time is
consistent with the due date. We thus propose the methodology
CHUNG et al.: DESIGN OF DUE DATE ASSIGNMENT MODEL AND THE DETERMINATION OF FLOW TIME CONTROL PARAMETERS
of determining wafer’s WIP level and daily moves for each
circuitry layer; all of these can be used as the parameters for
This paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews relevant researches on due date assignment problem. Section III
describes the due date assignment model and shows how
to calculate the flow time controlling parameters. Section IV
demonstrates the operation of due date assignment model using
actual data. Section V compares the performance of our due
date assignment model with other models. Finally, Section VI
makes conclusion and provides future research direction.
Manufacturing lead time is related to product’s process and
the results of production planning. This section thus briefly
describes the characteristics of wafer’s process and compares
the efficiency of different methods of the production planning.
This section also reviews a few different approaches of due
Wafer fabrication is a complex process. The number of
operation steps depends on the number of circuitry layers
required to complete the building of an integrated circuit
(IC). Generally, an IC product has 9 to 22 circuitry layers.
Each product’s circuit layer always requires the processing
on wafer stepper. Wafer stepper machine (photolithography
equipment) allows the transfer of patterns from masks to the
polymeric layer via exposure to ultra-violet light. The number
of photolithography steps is one measure of the difficulty of
Wafer stepper machine is the most expensive machine
in wafer fabrication factories. Due to the investment cost
consideration, the capacity extension of wafer stepper machine
will be carefully evaluated and is limited. With the concern of
resource efficiency and throughput, at the production planning
stage, the capacity of wafer stepper shall be fully utilized.
Therefore, wafer stepper is regarded as the bottleneck at the
Because each product will pass wafer stepper many times,
the delay occurring in one circuit layer’s processing on wafer
stepper machine will cause the delay of completion time of the
product. CCR is the resource which ,if not properly scheduled
and managed, is likely to cause the actual flow of product
through the plant to derive from the planned product flow [2].
Hence, the wafer stepper machine is a CCR and the occurrence
Manufacturing resources planning (MRP II) extends the
traditional concept of production planning and control (PPC).
However, lots of research pointed out the weakness and
deficiency of MRP II [1], [2]. Lozinski and Glassey [3] even
suggested that MRP II is not suitable for wafer fabrication.
Without considering workload on shop floor in the estimation of lead time, traditional concept of PPC results in
such problems as long lead time and high WIP. In the past
few years, the workload control (WC) concept for PPC was
proposed [4]. The WC concept employs certain rules for the
decisions of the upper production planning level concerning
WIP level to be maintained, size of work orders, etc., and in
turn leads to a pre-determined state of the manufacturing system (WIP, mean flow time, capacity utilization). The workload
concept can be separated as three decision models:
1) model for determining the optimal level of work-inprocess;
2) model for determining the released times (release periods) for the work orders to keep the work-in-process at
3) model for determining the optimal size of the work
orders, taking into account the impact on work-inprocess and flow times.
As to the due date assigning issues, there are two kinds
of due dates: the external due date and the internal due
date [10]. Because the determination of external due date,
assigned by the sales department, usually ignores the shop
conditions, the external due date tends to be latter than actual
delivery. Constant flow time (CON) and random assignment
[10] are usually adopted to assign external due date. With the
considering of shop conditions, internal due date, assigned by
scheduler, is more closer to actual delivery date than external
The methods of due date assignment used in the related
researches can be classified into four categories:
Direct procedures assign due date using such information as
job characteristics, shop condition and dynamic shop condition
[5]. This kind of methods is convenient and easily computing,
but some parameters have to be pre-determined by other ways.
As the computer technologies advancing continuously, simulation tends to be one of the methods for due date assignment
research. Vig and Dooley [6], Weeks [7], Kaplan and Unal
[8] adopted simulation in their research. Simulation benefits
in evaluating the effects of different polices without actual
Weeks [7], with the combination of different dispatching
rules and shop structures, evaluated the due date performance
of different due date assignment methods. Weeks employed
the pilot simulation to estimate mean flowing time, mean delay
time, and job numbers in shop. These parameters were used
With the considering of three factors: the operation numbers
of each job (one to nine), shop load status (balanced/
unbalanced), and pattern of processing time (deterministic/exponential), Kaplan and Unal [8] collected flowing
time data from the results of simulation. They evaluated
the relationship of a lots of variables and flowing time by
correlation analysis. Eventually, they choose mean workload
and maximum jobs in queue as the variables to estimate
Analytical method, based on queuing theory, estimates the
mean and standard deviation of flow time of orders [9]. Since
the assumptions of analytical method usually conflict with the
needs of real world, the applications of the result of analytical
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS, PACKAGING, AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY—PART C, VOL. 20, NO. 4, OCTOBER 1997
Operation set of the circuitry layer means all the operations
. “Moves” defines as that a wafer finishing the operation
set of any circuit layer. “Moves ” represents the completion
of critical operation. “Moves final” means that a wafer has
completed all operations, thus the value of “moves final”
represents the quantity of finished product.
Fig. 1. Critical operation and the operation set of circuitry layer j .
Statistical analysis uses the regression method [15] or the
relation analysis [8] to find the relations between flow time of
orders and other variables. The deficiency of statistical analysis
is that past trend may not exist in the future.
Because different research approaches possess their own
merits, some research begins to combine two or more approaches to intensify their methodology. Enns [9] combined
analytical method and simulation method. Besides that, Kaplan
and Unal [8] adopted both simulation method and statistical
analysis to estimate flow time. They proposed the due date
is standard deviation of estimating error.
Due date assignment model of this paper uses both simulation method and queuing theory to estimate flow time and
establish control parameters for flow time. We will adopt the
idea of (1) in our due date assignment model.
This section firstly introduces the concept of circuit layer
segmentation for the purpose of WIP controlling. Secondly,
we describe the assumption of this paper. Thirdly, we take an
overview of the three stages of due date assignment model
(DDAM) and then sequentially describe the detailed thoughts
and procedures of each stage of DDAM. Finally, we point out
The characteristic of reentry in wafer’s fabrication process
complicates the material flow in the shop floor and makes the
scheduling work be challenging. The reentry characteristics
cause that the starting date of wafers’ flowing to some circuitry
layers depends on the departing date of wafers at previous
circuitry layers. Here, we simplify the schedule planning
by exploiting the reentry characteristics and regarding the
circuitry layer as the element for WIP level controlling.
We divide wafer’s process into many subsets according to
the positions of stepper machine operation in wafer’s process
(Fig. 1). Critical operation is the operation being processed
on stepper machine, the additional one is the end operation,
without passing by stepper machine, of the entire process.
Assume that the wafer fabrication factory produces different
kinds of products and the product mix ratio is given before the
planning of master production schedule. Since each product
type has its distinct process plan and processing time, the initial
WIP status or the product mix ratio will affect the workload
of each workstation and the flow time of each products. The
DDAM must be executed for each planning period due to the
change of system WIP level or the product mix ratio.
To be consistent with the processing batch size of thermal
oxidation process so as to raise the utilization rates of equipment, the batch size of material releasing is six lots (one lot
Machine breakdown interferes the flowing of product. The
mean time between failure (MTBF) and mean time to repair (MTTR) in the DDAM are assume to be exponentially
Compared with other dispatching rules, “first in first out”
(FIFO) rule does not help to enhance the due date performance
[6], [9]. To achieve better due date performance at shop floor
execution stage, the FIFO rule is adopted as the dispatching
rule for each workstation in DDAM. Such adoption also
facilitates us to use the Little’s law [13] of queueing theory to
C. Three Stages of Due Date Assignment Model (DDAM)
The due date assignment model can be separated into three
1) the use of simulation results as the base for production
2) the estimating of release date for each order;
Firstly, using the simulation results of ManSim (product
of TYECIN System, Inc.), we will establish the relationship
between system WIP, mean system throughput and mean
flow time. Observing this relationship, the lowest system
WIP level corresponding to the desired throughput level can
be determined. To more precisely control the flow time of
products, we suggest to transform the system WIP and mean
system throughput into the corresponding values for each
product type, and then for each layer of each product type.
These values can be use as the parameters for the flow time
Before running simulation model, collecting input data
is necessary, including: product mix ratio, material release
sequence in a release cycle, process plans, and initial WIP
status. “Cyclic” material release policy is adopted so that the
system WIP is dispersed to each product type according the
CHUNG et al.: DESIGN OF DUE DATE ASSIGNMENT MODEL AND THE DETERMINATION OF FLOW TIME CONTROL PARAMETERS
Fig. 2. Three stages of the due date assignment model.
Secondly, given the system WIP level, the fixed WIP policy
is adopted to control the releasing of material. Lot releasing
relates two matters: deciding when to release material and
choosing product type for lot release. Fixed WIP control policy
is the mechanism for deciding when to release material. At
the releasing time, the product type with the highest priority
calculated by an equation is chosen for lot releasing.
Finally, referring the idea of (1), the due date of an order can
be set by the planned releasing date and the flowing time of the
product type of this order. These values have been determined
or collected from the first two parts of DDAM.
The analysis of capacity availability is necessary at the
production planning stage. In this paper, we adopt simulation
as the tool for capacity planning and for estimating the
throughput of system. The production planning horizon for
assigning orders’ due dates shall be long enough to cover the
accumulated lead time of all product types that belong to a
Weindahl [16] discussed the effects of time limits parameters (length of planning horizon) in simulation and practice.
He concluded that three time periods are a reasonable starting
value. Our DDAM adopted three time periods as the planning
horizon. A time period equals to four weeks, so that the
1) The Determination of Suitable System WIP Level The
system performance is different under different system WIP
level. Therefore, we run simulation many times with different
WIP levels to observe the corresponding system performances.
To get a steady state environment so as to observe the
system performance at a specified WIP level, we run a
simulation model twice. The simulation parameters for the first
and the second run are the same. The results of simulation are
gathered only from the second run. Using the “from prior run”
option of ManSim, the WIP data at the end of first simulation
run will be the initial WIP data for the second simulation.
The planning horizon (12 weeks) is long enough to make
the system be steady state. Hence, the data collected from
the second simulation run is a presentation of steady state
At each simulation run, the results of system throughput
and mean system flow time can be derived. If we use ManSim’s Kanban option and specify one kind of kanban for the
operation set of a layer, then the number of system moves
( ) can also be derived. The system throughput states the
number of end products being produced, while the daily moves
represents the number of layers being completed. Observing
and comparing the simulation results of different WIP levels,
we can find the lowest system WIP level ( ) corresponding to
the desired throughput level. Fixing at this lowest WIP level,
the corresponding flow time for each product type ( ) and
the utilization rate for each machine type can also be found
Under the objective of maximizing throughput, we shall
raise the up-time utilization rate of bottleneck to be near
100%. When the utilization rate of bottleneck is below 100%,
the increasing of system WIP level will raise the utilization
rate of bottleneck and extend the throughput level. After the
utilization rate of bottleneck reaches 100%, the increasing of
system WIP level can’t extend throughput but lengthen lead
time. Hence, the suitable system WIP level is the lowest WIP
level that has the maximal throughput level.
When the system reached the steady state, Little’s law
can be applied to examine the correctness of the relationship
between system throughput, system WIP level, and system
mean flow time. Equations (9) and (10) in Section IV shows
the validation of the simulation results.
2) Planning from the Viewpoint of a Product Type and
Product Type’s Layer We concern not only the length of
the mean flow time but also the stability of flow time.
Material flow will be stable if that the system WIP is properly
distributed to all layers of each product type and that the
fabrication of wafer is not concentrated on some specific
layers. Therefore, it needs to plan the WIP level and daily
moves in the viewpoint of a product type and product type’s
layer. The following paragraphs will show how to derive the
planned WIP level and planned daily moves for each product
If one product type has high ratio in the product mix, its WIP
shall be high. On the other hand, if one product type needs
longer flow time, its WIP shall be high too. From the above
two viewpoints, the determination of each product’s WIP is
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS, PACKAGING, AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY—PART C, VOL. 20, NO. 4, OCTOBER 1997
based on its product mix ratio and flow time
is ratio of product mix for product type ,
Referring to the definition of “move,” the higher product
mix ratio and the more layers of a process plan stand for the
more moves of that product type. Basing on the above reason,
the moves of each product type will be proportional to each
product type’s mix ratio and its numbers of layers
circuitry layers for product type that need to pass through
of a product type. The WIP distribution at each layer of a
product will relate to its flow time passing by each circuitry
layer. In other words, if the flow time for a layer is longer
than others, for one specific product type, there are more WIP
is planned WIP level for layer of product type
is mean flow time for layer of product type
To make the material flow stable and smoothing, the release
of material is controlled by the fixed system WIP policy
and is arranged to maintain the predetermined product mix.
Conceptually, for a product type, one operation of a layer
cannot be started before the finishing of the operation set of
the previous layer. Thus, the planned daily moves of each
product type shall be equally distributed into each circuitry
layer. In this way, the daily move for each layer of a product
type is stable and harmonized with its product mix ratio
is planned daily moves for layer of product type .
2) Choosing Product Type for Lot Releasing: Making the
WIP distribution of all product types be close to the ratio
of the product mix will help the leveling of throughput. A
planning material release cycle can be designed based on such
idea. However, unexpected or random events may interrupt or
delay the throughput sequencing or timing. Thus, before the
releasing of a batch, the priority check is necessary to prevent
the WIP distribution deviating from the product mix ratio. The
choosing of next releasing batch is determined by the weight
calculation. Equation (6) is applied for each product type under
the condition that the fixed system total WIP constraint must
be satisfied. Only when the weight of a product type is less or
equal to one, the batch of this product type is allowed to be
released. The lowest weight means the highest priority
“The release batch size” means the number of lots released
at the same time and is fixed at six lots. “The accumulated
unreleased numbers of lots” for each product type is calculated
based on the planned daily final moves, defined in (5). If a
product type is not allowed for releasing, its planned daily
final moves will be accumulated to the next day. On the other
hand, if a product type is chosen for releasing, then six lots is
deduced from the accumulated unreleased number of lots.
For example, the planned daily final moves for product
and are 4, 3, 6, 5, 2 and 1 lots individually.
Thus, on the first day, the weight of each product type is
1.5, 2, 1, 1.2, 3, and 6 individually. Suppose that product is
allowed to be released. Then, on the next day, the accumulated
unreleased numbers of lots for each product type are 8, 6, 6,
10, 4 and 2. And the weight of each product type is changed
to be 0.75, 1, 1, 0.6, 1.5, and 3. Product
The release batch size is fixed at six lots. If the lot size of an
order for some product type is greater than six, this order will
be divided into more than one batch. The release date of the
latest batch of an order is used as the release date of this order.
Applying the results of previous sections, the completion
time of an order is equal to the release time of the order plus
the flow time of the corresponding product type
Since the lot release time is related to the level of WIP, this
section will discuss the major two works of lot releasing:
1) Deciding When to Release Material: Since we adopt
fixed WIP as the WIP control policy, a new batch will allow
to be released into system when one batch completes all the
operations of the corresponding process plan. Because the
timing and frequency that unexpected events occur usually
differ from what the simulation presents, the material release
time shown in a simulation run can just be a reference.
circuitry layers of product type that is specified by the latest
Because there are some physical environment factors not
considering in the simulation model, safety allowance shall be
CHUNG et al.: DESIGN OF DUE DATE ASSIGNMENT MODEL AND THE DETERMINATION OF FLOW TIME CONTROL PARAMETERS
SIMULATION RESULTS OF THE SYSTEM FOR DIFFERENT
WIP LEVELS. * THE UTILIZATION RATE OF BOTTLENECK
RESOURCE IS CALCULATED BASED ON THE MACHINE UP TIME
Fig. 3. Relationship between system WIP level, system throughput and mean
Based on the concept of WIP control and the layer planning results of DDAM, May [14] modifies the method of
two boundary (TB) [11] to control the lot release and to
dispatch the parts to the bottleneck machine. For nonbottleneck
machines, May considered both the operation characteristics
of primary machines (stepper, furnace, etcher, implanter and
sputter) and the WIP level of each layer for each product type
to design the dispatching rules. May pointed that the modified
two boundary method can effectively control the lot release
quantity and timing, as well as the WIP level. The modified
TB method can increase the system throughput and shorten
mean system flow time. Thus, the planned due date of orders
This section demonstrates the process of due date assignment model described in Section III with actual data.
The data of workstations, and process plans of the example
are collected from a wafer fabrication factory in Taiwan. The
wafer fabrication factory in this example produces six product
1) Length of planning horizon: The planning horizon of this
example is set as 12 weeks, and the planning time period
2) Setting the product mix ratio: The times of each product
type passing by bottleneck (wafer stepper machine) is
14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9. Since the demand of each product
in the planning horizon has been investigated and judged
by the authority, the product mix ratio for each product
3) Data of workstation: There are 39 kinds of workstations of the wafer fabrication factories in this example.
Wafer stepper workstation (numbering 27) is defined
as bottleneck resource. The mean time between failure
(MTBF) and the mean time to repair (MTTR) of such
workstations are exponentially distributed.
4) The batch size and policy for material releasing: The
batch size of material releasing for each product type
is 6 lots. Only when the total system WIP is below the
pre-specified level, new batch is allowed to be released.
5) Cyclic material releasing sequence: The cyclic material
releasing sequence for all product types in each
simulation run shall be designed with the consideration of due date urgency for each product type.
kind of releasing sequence for our example. This cyclic
sequence is consistent with the product mix ratio.
6) Dispatching rule: In the simulation model, the dispatching rule for every workstation is “first in first out”
B. The Determination of Suitable System WIP Level
Table I summaries the system performance values under
different WIP levels. Fig. 3 presents the trends of throughput
Observing the relations in Fig. 3, we can determine the
suitable WIP level to be 240 lots. This is the lowest WIP level
without wasting the up-time capacity of bottleneck resource.
It also corresponds to the shortest average cycle time with
Referring to the data of Table I, the system throughput is
572 wafers/per product type per week when the WIP level is
To validate the results of simulation, we apply Little’s
formula to examine the correctness of the relationship between
system throughput, system WIP level, and system mean flow
time. By transforming the unit of system throughput into lots
(one lot contains 24 piece wafers), 572 wafers/per product
type per week is equal to 143 lots/per week (
system throughput 143.885 [the derivation is shown in (9) and
(10)] is very close to the transformed throughput (143 lots per
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS, PACKAGING, AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY—PART C, VOL. 20, NO. 4, OCTOBER 1997
EACH LAYER OF EACH PRODUCT TYPE (UNIT: LOT)
MEAN FLOWING TIME FOR EACH LAYER OF EACH PRODUCT TYPE (UNIT: HR: MM)
PLANNED DAILY MOVES FOR EACH LAYER OF EACH PRODUCT TYPE (UNIT: LOT)
C. Planning from the Viewpoint of a Product
The simulation reports also provide the mean flow time
After applying the data of Tables I and II to (2) and (3), we
can derive the planned WIP level and planned daily moves for
each product type. These data are displayed in Table IV.
To derive the planned WIP level and planned daily moves
for each layer of each product type, we then apply the data
of Tables III and IV to (4) and (5). Tables V and VI display
the results. The daily final moves of product – is 3.9, 2.93,
5.85, 4.88, 1.95, 0.98 (lots) individually, and is harmonized
to the product mix ratio. The summation of each product’s
daily final moves is equivalent to daily throughput (20.49 lots).
The weekly throughput can then be derived from the daily
the system throughput (143.885 lots) deriving previously from
To estimate lot releasing date, we transformed the idea of
lot release planning of this paper into a C language program.
By the aid of this program, the estimated lot releasing date
Using the lot releasing date shown in Table VII and the
mean flowing time of each product shown in Table II, the
completion time of an order can be calculated by applying (7).
Adding safety allowance (safety factor is 0.05), the order’s due
date can be determined (8). Table VIII shows the due date for
This section compares the performance of DDAM of this
paper with other models, such as the constant flow time (CON)
[10] and the total work content (TWK) [10].
As described in the literature review, CON belongs to
external due date assignment method. CON is applied to
CON(1) and CON(2) model with different lot releasing factor.
CHUNG et al.: DESIGN OF DUE DATE ASSIGNMENT MODEL AND THE DETERMINATION OF FLOW TIME CONTROL PARAMETERS
BATCH RELEASING DATE. * BRD: BATCH RELEASING DAY
determined by means of trial and error to make the system
mean lateness be close to zero. The results show: when the
flow time is 44 days, the system mean lateness (0.46) is the
closest to zero. Contrarily, CON(2) considers the dynamic
release time of each batch of an order. CON(2) records
the releasing date for each batch of each order in the first
simulation run as the releasing time in the second simulation
run. The results show: when the flow time is 13 days, the
system mean lateness ( 0.33) is the closest to zero
is the releasing date for the latest batch of order .
The estimation of flow time for TWK bases on the total
processing time (total work content). TWK is also applied
into TWK(1) and TWK(2), just as the two lot releasing factors
considered in CON(1) and CON(2). By trial and error, when
the flow time is set as 7.1 times of total processing time of
each product batch, the system mean lateness ( 0.22) is the
THE DUE DATE OF EACH ORDER. * RDLB: RELEASING DAY
OF LATEST BATCH. ** ECT: ESTIMATED COMPLETION TIME (DAY)
is the total time for processing one batch of the
The parameter of TWK(2) is between 1.0 to 3.0. The results
of trial and error testing show: when the parameter is 2.0, the
system mean lateness (0.08) is the closest to zero. Similarly
to CON(2), TWK(2) adopts the actual order releasing date as
CON(1), without considering the WIP status of shop floor,
adopts the static planned release time. To make the due
date assignment be reasonable, the length of flow time is
To compare the performance of our DDAM with the other
four ones, we use six different kinds of performance measures:
mean lateness, lateness variance, number of tardy job, percentage of tardy job, mean square error, and mean absolute error.
The summary of comparison is displayed in Table IX.
From Table IX, we can draw some observations.
1) Compared with other models, DDAM of this paper
brings the best performance in mean lateness and the
lowest percentage of tardy job. We try to analyze the
reason why the completion date of orders is 0.98 days
earlier than due date. We find that the actual order
releasing date is 1.94 days earlier, in average, than
planning order releasing date and that the actual flow
time for each order is 0.96 days longer, in average,
than the planned flow time. Table X shows the related
information about due date deviation. These deviations
show that the planning result cannot be 100% accurate
because of random events and statistical fluctuations
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS, PACKAGING, AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY—PART C, VOL. 20, NO. 4, OCTOBER 1997
THE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON SUMMARY OF FIVE
DDAM. * TOTAL NUMBER OF DELIVERED BATCHES IS 210
we determine such parameters as the planned WIP level and
planned daily moves for each layer of each product. These
parameters can be exploited to control the progress of orders
to fulfill due date. These parameters can also be used when
adopting the rigorous material releasing/dispatching rules, such
As for the future research direction, there is a need to
study the deviations between actual order releasing dates and
planning order releasing dates (Table X). Moreover, the setting
of safety factor to absorb the variance of the system to enhance
due date performance is another future research topic.
SOURCES OF LATENESS OF DDAM IN THIS PAPER.
2) CON(1) and TWK(1) adopt the static material release
method. When the mean lateness is set around zero,
the percentage of tardy jobs is around 50%. However,
both models are poor performed in tardiness, mean
square error, and mean absolute error. This observation
is consistent with our opinion that material releasing
control policy will affect material flow time and due
3) The DDAM uses the layer flow time to estimate the
material release time. Although it is not always better
than CON(2) and TWK(2) in each criterion, the departure, in some criteria, is small. Moreover, the order
releasing dates for CON(2) and TWK(2) are the actual
order releasing dates. In the real environment, actual
order releasing date is difficult or impossible to get.
From realistic consideration, our DDAM will perform
[1] P. Higgins, K. Tierney, and J. Browne, “From MRPII to MRP,” Prod.
Plan Contr., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 227–238, 1992.
[2] G. Reimer, “Material requirements planning and theory of constraints:
Can they coexist? A case study,” Prod. Inventory Manage J., Fourth
[3] C. Lozinski and C. R. Glassey, “Bottleneck starvation indicators for
shop floor control,” IEEE Trans. Semiconduct. Manufact., vol. 1, pp.
[4] G. Zapfel and H. Missbauer, “New concept for production planning and
control,” Euro. J. Operat. Res., vol. 67, pp. 297–320, 1993.
[5] M. L. Smith and A. Seidman, “Due date selection procedure for job-shop
simulation,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 199–207, 1983.
[6] M. M. Vig and K. J. Dooley, “Dynamic rules for due-date assignment,”
Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1361–1377, 1991.
[7] J. K. Weeks, “A simulation study of predictable due-dates,” Manage
[8] A. C. Kaplan and A. T. Urnal, “A probabilistic cost-based due date
assignment model for job shops,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 31, no. 12, pp.
[9] S. T. Enns, “Job shop flow time prediction and tardiness control using
queueing analysis,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 2045–2057,
[10] T. C. E. Chen and M. C. Gupta, “Survey of scheduling research
involving due date determining decisions,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 38,
[11] H. Yan, S. Lou, S. Sethi, A. Gardel, and P. Deosthali, “Testing the
robustness of two-boundary control policies in semiconductor manufacturing,” IEEE Trans. Semiconduct. Manufact., vol. 9, pp. 1–24, Feb.
[12] M. M. Umble and M. L. Srikanth, Synchronous Manufacturing.
[13] J. H. Dshalalow, Advances in Queueing: Theory, Methods, and Open
[14] J. R. May and S. H. Chung, “The design of dispatching rule for the
primary machines of wafer fabrication factories,” M.S. thesis, Inst.
Industr. Eng., National Chiao Tung Univ., Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.,
[15] C. H. Smith, E. D. Minor, and H. J. Wen, “Regression-based due date
assignment rules for improved assembly shop performance,” Int. J. Prod.
Res., vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 2375–2385, 1995.
[16] H.-P. Wiendahl, Load-Oriented Manufacturing Control. New York:
[17] L. F. Atherton and R. W. Atherton, Wafer Fabrication: Factory Performance and Analysis. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1995.
In this paper, we propose a due date assignment model
to assign an achievable due date to an order. Also, we
construct a hierarchical planning structure to establish flow
time controlling parameters. In the planning structure, we
firstly determine the proper system WIP level, mean system
throughput and mean system flow time. Secondly, referring the
mean flow time of each product type, the planned WIP level
and planned daily moves for each product can be calculated.
Finally, using each circuitry layer as the planning object,
Shu-Hsing Chung received the Ph.D. degree in
industrial engineering from Texas A&M University,
She is Professor with the Industrial Engineering
and Management Department, National Chiao-Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. Her research
interests include production planning, scheduling,
system simulation, and production planning of IC
manufacturing. She has published and presented research papers in the areas of flexible manufacturing
system planning, scheduling, and cell formation.
CHUNG et al.: DESIGN OF DUE DATE ASSIGNMENT MODEL AND THE DETERMINATION OF FLOW TIME CONTROL PARAMETERS
Ming-Hsien Yang received the M.S. degree in industrial engineering and management from National
Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
He is a Graduate Student with the Industrial
Engineering and Management Department, National
Chiao-Tung University. He is also a Lecturer of Industrial Engineering and Management Department,
National Lien Ho College of Technology and Commerce, Taiwan. His research interests include production planning and system simulation.
Cho-Ming Cheng received the M.S. degree in industrial engineering and management from National
Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
His research interests include production planning
