A Framework for Standard Modular Simulation:
Application to Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication
Heshan Li1 , José A. Ramírez-Hernández1, Emmanuel Fernandez1, Charles R. McLean2 , and Swee Leong2
Abstract— This paper presents the application of a framework,
proposed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), for standard modular simulation of semiconductor wafer
fabrication facilities or fabs. The application of the proposed
framework results in the identification and specification of four
different elements in the context of semiconductor fabs: (1)
market sector, (2) hierarchical modeling levels, (3) simulation
case studies, and (4) models and data. Three examples of the application of the proposed simulation framework are presented by
using three semiconductor fab models: the Mini-fab benchmark,
Measurement and Improvement of Manufacturing Capacities
(MIMAC) data set 1, and the Hewlett-Packard-Wein’s model.
In these examples, three different case studies are presented,
which consisted in the evaluation of production performance
under different workforces, dispatching rules, and wafer lot
release rates. The proposed simulation framework is by no means
considered complete, and future additions and modifications are
expected. Our current and future research is focused on the
improvement of the proposed framework (e.g., design and testing
of generic case studies) as well as the incorporation of the work
being conducted by NIST, within the NIST’s System Integration
of Manufacturing Applications (SIMA) program, towards the
standardization of data formats for simulation in manufacturing
Index Terms— Semiconductor wafer fabrication, standard
modular simulation, simulation framework, semiconductor fabs,
front-end process, simulation case studies.
Simulation models for semiconductor wafer fabrication are
considered important tools for supporting the decision-making
processes in manufacturing operations. Although the importance of simulation models has been clearly stated [23], [31],
currently there is no standardization for models and data
or simulation case studies in the semiconductor industry. In
general, each commercial simulation software vendor offers its
own data formats for modeling and data representation. The
non-existence of standards in this area increases the difficulties
associated with the simulation process when a model of the
semiconductor fabrication facility or fab does not exist, and
simulation case studies need to be designed.
The industry and academic communities have indicated in
the past [15] the clear need for standardization of modeling
1 José A. Ramírez-Hernández, Heshan Li, and Emmanuel Fernandez are
with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Computer
Science, The Systems Modeling and Information Technology Laboratory
(SMITLab) at the University of Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA. The work of
these authors was supported by a grant from NIST.
Emails: ramirejs@ececs.uc.edu; lihs@ececs.uc.edu; emmanuel@ececs.uc.edu.
2 Charles R. McLean and Swee Leong, are with the Manufacturing Systems
Integration Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
Emails: charles.mclean@nist.gov; leong@cme.nist.gov.
data in semiconductor manufacturing. For instance, an attempt
for obtaining a standard was presented by SEMATECH with
the so-called Modeling Data Standards (MDS) [55], and
another initiative, from Semiconductor Equipment & Materials
International (SEMI), was mentioned in [15]; but both with little or no success at all. According to some experts [16], in this
simulation field, it appears that these attempts have not been
attractive for the commercial vendors of simulation software,
basically for commercial reasons. Although these attempts
have failed in the past, the importance for standardization
of modeling data is still needed, and this could represent a
valuable improvement in current simulation practices.
In an attempt to narrow this gap, the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) has identified the need for
standards in simulation and modeling in different industries,
including the semiconductor manufacturing industry. Work
is being conducted by NIST, within the System Integration
of Manufacturing Applications (SIMA) program, to provide
standards in simulation of manufacturing systems that in the
future can facilitate the work of simulation groups or analysts
at different industries. Part of the efforts has been in the
formulation of a Framework For Standard Modular Simulation
[38], [39], and Standard Exchange Data Formats [32] that
could facilitate the utilization of simulation models and case
studies with different commercial simulation packages utilized
The main objective of this paper is to provide a framework
for modular simulation of semiconductor fabs. We propose this
framework based on the approach presented in [38], [39] and
by providing specific details of each element in the framework
in the context of the semiconductor manufacturing industry.
This paper is organized as follows: section II presents an
overview of NIST’s SIMA program. In section III we present a
brief review of the semiconductor manufacturing process at the
fabrication level. A review of the utilization of simulation tools
in the semiconductor industry is presented in section IV. The
application of the framework for standard modular simulation
for semiconductor wafer fabrication is presented in sections V,
VI, and VII. Sections VIII, IX, and X describe three examples
of the application of this framework, and section XI presents
II. NIST S YSTEM I NTEGRATION OF M ANUFACTURING
The High Performance Computing and Communication
(HPCC) program was formally established by the High Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-194). The
goal of this program is to accelerate the development of future
generations of high performance computers and networks and
the use of these resources in the government and throughout
the U.S. economy. The SIMA program at NIST is the agency’s
coordinating focus for its HPCC activities. SIMA is addressing
the information interface needs of the U.S. manufacturing
• Defining, testing, and promoting standards for interoperability solutions, and
• Facilitating remote access to scientific and engineering
The Manufacturing Systems Integration Division (MSID) was
established to contribute to the research and development of
data standards, generic interfaces and technologies leading to
the implementation of virtual manufacturing enterprises and
MSID has been working on the development of a generic
manufacturing information model for representing and exchanging production simulation data. This document presents
an information model that provides neutral data interfaces for
integrating machine shop software applications with simulation. The model is presented by using the Unified Modeling
Language (UML) [45] and the eXtensible Markup Language
(XML) [66]. The initial emphasis of this data model is
focusing on the machine job shop definitions. Plans are in
place to extend the data structures to include other relevant
areas such as supply chain, plant layout, and assembly.
As a part of the standards development effort, NIST has
organized a Product Development Group (PDG) titled, "Core
Manufacturing Simulation Data (CMSD)" within the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO). The
model will be the strawman of the first product of the CMSD
PDG. SISO is dedicated to the promotion and development
of standards for Modeling and Simulation (M&S), system
interoperability, and reuse for the benefit of diverse M&S
communities, including developers, procurers, and users, in
the world-wide simulation communities. For more details see
MSID has partners in industry end-users, software vendors and government agencies with diverse interests such
as: steel fabrication, electromechanical production, semiconductor, die casting, injection molding, machining, automotive
and aerospace assembly, inspection, human operator modeling,
ergonomics analysis, supply chain, discrete event models, and
The fabrication of semiconductor devices or integrated
circuits (IC), also known as semiconductor manufacturing,
involves four basic steps [62], [2], [49]: wafer fabrication,
The wafer probe and fabrication are considered as "frontend" processes, which are dedicated to building the ICs in
the silicon wafer as well as performing preliminary tests. The
assembly and final test are considered as "back-end" processes
that are focused on testing functionality and performance, and
In this paper we are focused on the modeling and simulation
of the semiconductor wafer fabrication process that takes place
in the semiconductor fab. In general, we refer to the simulation
of the semiconductor fab when we talk about simulation of the
Semiconductor wafer fabrication is probably one of the most
intensive manufacturing processes, not only for its complexity
but for the amount of capital invested. It usually involves
several hundreds of processing steps. Moreover, since the
number of operations that have to be carried out exceeds the
number of available machines, several of these operations are
done at the same work centers or tool stations. This means that
wafer lots visit a tool station more than once. A manufacturing
system having this feature is called a re-entrant line [27], [29],
[28]. In addition, some wafers could need rework during the
production, which makes the process more complicated.
A semiconductor fab can be viewed as a job shop containing
a number of single-tool or multi-tool stations with re-entrant
manufacturing lines. Wafers are grouped in lots and each lot
entering the fab has a specific process flow or route (e.g.,
sequence to visit different stations). The wafers in the same
lot will have the same process flow, however, different lots can
have different process flows. That is, there could be several
different products being produced (e.g., product mix) in the
same production line. Also, the number of wafers in a lot is
not fixed (e.g., it could be 24 or 48). The number of lots that
can be loaded and processed simultaneously in a tool varies
according to the operation and tool being utilized. Some tools
will accept only one lot of wafers while others will allow
batches of several lots. Similarly, the batch size will vary
according to the process and tool. For example, several wafer
lots will be batched in a furnace that can hold 200 wafers.
The wafer fabrication process is composed of seven basic
operations [2], [49], sequentially performed as follows: (1)
Cleaning; (2) Oxidation, Deposition and Metalization; (3)
Lithography; (4) Etching; (5) Ion implantation; (6) Photoresist strip; and (7) Inspection and measurement. In general,
tool stations are integrated according to the operation to
be performed. When these operations are performed in a
re-entrant manufacturing line, several difficulties arise that
convert the wafer fabrication as one of the most complex
manufacturing processes. For instance, Uzsoy, Lee, & MartinVega [62], and Bai & Gershwin [4], discussed six factors
that are identified as linked to the complexity of this type
of manufacturing process: (1) Complex Product Flows; (2)
Random Yields; (3) Diverse Equipment Characteristics; (4)
Equipment Downtime; (5) Production and Development in
Shared Facilities; and (6) Data Availability and Maintenance.
These factors are characteristics that are continuously present
Simulation models of semiconductor fabs are utilized to
address these problems (e.g., to evaluate and analyze alternative strategies that support the decision-making process).
This task is performed by defining simulation case studies
that are used to answer questions (e.g., "what-if" questions)
about specific problems. The conclusions derived from the
simulation work can help to improve manufacturing operations
by implementing alternative strategies that have been analyzed
and validated through a simulation analysis procedure.
In order to illustrate the importance of simulation tools in
the current semiconductor industry, the next section provides
a general review of the different areas where simulation is
Simulation tools are an essential part in the complex process
of semiconductor devices design and manufacturing. These
tools are part of the so-called Technology of Computer-Aided
Design (TCAD) [13], which encapsulates a wide variety of
hardware and software tools currently utilized in the process
of design, fabrication, process control, and management in the
semiconductor industry. The wide spread acceptance of these
tools is justified by the enormous benefit of TCAD in rapid
prototyping and costs saving during design, manufacturing,
planning, and even customer satisfaction. Current TCAD tools
allow the industry the deployment of new technologies in a
shorter time with the appropriate production volumes and ontime delivery, which are key elements to be competitive in the
actual semiconductor market. Similarly, this has produced a
positive effect in the creation of new TCAD tools, including
As ICs have become more sophisticated, and critical features in the IC are continuously downscaled, the utilization of
simulation tools has been expanded to different areas of the
manufacturing and design processes. Figure 1 depicts current
levels in the hierarchy of simulation for the semiconductor
Simulation hierarchy in semiconductor manufacturing.
The hierarchy of simulations presented in Figure 1 shows
that the simulation of the supply chain represents the highest
level and encloses all the other simulation levels. The second
level corresponds to simulation in the front-end and back-end
processes. The subsequent levels are focused on the simulation
of the semiconductor device and materials [13], [56]. These
levels are shared by the front-end and back-end processes.
The simulation of semiconductor devices includes simulation
of electrical, mechanical, and thermal behavior as well as
logic simulation utilized for design and synthesis of digital
circuits. The lowest level is represented by simulations at the
“quantum” modeling level, also known as Ab-Initio.
The following subsections provide a more detailed presentation of the different levels of simulation. We divided the
hierarchy in four main simulation groups from the lowest to
A. Simulation of Semiconductor Devices and Materials
Simulation of semiconductor devices and materials includes
different areas in the process of manufacturing and design.
It is focused on modeling and the simulation of physical
behavior of the devices and materials utilized in the fabrication
of ICs. As presented in Figure 1, this level of simulation is
a core component in the back-end and front-end processes.
Moreover, different sub-levels are considered; from simulation
of electrical behavior of the circuits to atomistic and quantum
The impact of this type of simulation in the back-end and
front-end processes can be defined as a two way process. In
one direction, simulation of devices and materials is utilized
to design and optimize the devices being fabricated and the
corresponding fabrication tools. On the other hand, simulation
of the manufacturing process (e.g., simulation of fabrication
equipment functionality) is useful to determine how the fabrication process affects the final production of devices with
respect to the expected design and performance [56].
In a detailed review of perspectives of TCAD tools in the
semiconductor industry presented in [13], Dutton & Strojwas
indicated how circuit models and simulations are utilized to
quantify details of behavioral models for ICs at the circuit
and transistor levels with the objective to show physical
limitations at the process and manufacturing levels. These
authors reported how simulation tools have been utilized to improve diagnosis procedures to identify yield loss mechanisms,
and provide an interface between design and manufacturing.
Similarly, in circuit simulations, Enz et al. reported in [14] a
basis for modeling of Metal Oxide Silicon (MOS) transistors
for circuit simulation at Radio Frequency (RF) utilizing a
Simulation Program for Integrated Circuit Emphasis (SPICE)
models (a widely utilized circuit modeling language for simulation [56]). Simulation of circuits at RF operations have
been identified by the International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (ITRS) [56] as one of the difficult challenges
toward the development of new technology in the range of ≤
45 nm in the feature size through the year 2010.
Current modeling of circuits is very detailed; from electrical
parameters to the modeling of thermal noises, and it is
tightly related to the physical structure of the components
(e.g., transistors). For instance, Rappitsch et. al. [53] proposed techniques for extracting the parameters necessary to
implement accurate SPICE circuit models. These techniques
include Monte Carlo methods and non-parametric statistical
procedures. In design and synthesis of digital circuits, Agrawal
et. al. in [1] and Bryant in [9] reported the utilization of logic
simulation of Very Large Scale Integration circuits (VLSI) and
utilization of Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams (OBDDs)
for digital design purposes. In [19], Hamzaoglu et. al. discuss
the utilization of compaction algorithms to obtain test sets
for combinatorial circuits. These test sets can be employed,
together with logical simulation, during the process of digital
In addition, Choi et. al. [12] reported the impact of the
manufacturing process in the final IC performance and the
utilization of simulation tools. In this case simulation tools
are utilized to model the timing effects in the IC performance
as product of the imperfections produced by the lithography process (e.g., lens aberrations, flare). Similarly, Ikeda
et. al. [20] utilized simulations to predict mechanical stress
in semiconductor devices during the manufacturing process
with the objective to optimize the fabrication process and
IC reliability. In [6], Binder et. al. discussed the integration
of device and manufacturing simulations, and presented a
case of 3-dimensional simulation models of semiconductor
device structures utilized in both the design and manufacturing
At the level of atomistic simulations, La Magna et. al.
reported in [30] how simulation tools, based on quantum
modeling, were utilized to simulate in detail the evolution
of nano-structures (e.g., defects, impurity aggregates) in the
All the examples previously presented have common objectives: utilization of TCAD simulation tools to accelerate the
design and prototyping of new devices as well as to optimize
the performance of the final product and its fabrication process.
B. Back-end: assembling, sorting, and testing processes simulation
In the back-end process, simulations have been utilized to
emulate the process of assembling, sorting, and testing of
semiconductor devices. The main objectives of simulations
in this stage are to design planning and control strategies
that minimize the cycle time, and maximize throughput while
accomplishing on-time deliveries of the final products.
For instance, Sivakumar et. al. reported in [57], [58] the
utilization of discrete-event simulations of real world back-end
facilities in Singapore. A scheme of multiple objective optimization was presented, through Pareto solutions [67], which
included cycle time and throughput. Their results provided an
analysis of the impact of dispatching rules, and lot release
control over the cycle time and throughput in an IC assembly
and test facility. Also, in a more specific utilization of simulation tools for the back-end process, Chikamura et. al. in
[11] and Nakamae et. al. in [43] reported how simulation was
utilized to optimize the testing process for VLSI circuits: Dynamic Random Access Memories (RAMs), and Synchronous
Dynamic Access Memories (DRAMs). The objective was to
obtain the optimal number of testers according to the best
trade-off between Turn Around Time (TAT) and cost per chip.
Finally, Potodari et. al. [50] utilized simulation in the backend process, and focused on the bottleneck equipment with the
objective of maximizing demand fulfillment subject to systems
constraints. The optimization gave as a result the scheduling
of operations and starts of material into the back-end facility.
C. Front-end Processes: wafer fab simulation
Simulation in the higher level of the front-end process is
focused on the simulation of the manufacturing operations
of wafer fabrication facilities. Simulation tools are utilized to
support the decision-making process in control and planning
As mentioned in section II, the wafer fab is one of the
most complex systems in the process of manufacturing of
semiconductor devices. Therefore, simulation in this level is
a valuable tool that is utilized for analysis, decision-making,
design, and optimization of control and planning strategies
There are a wide variety of activities in the wafer fabs where
simulation is utilized. For instance, Wein discussed in [65] the
impact of scheduling in wafer fab operations in cycle time and
throughput. The study was performed utilizing a simulation
model and comparing the effect of different dispatching rules
and input regulation strategies. Wein also compared the effect
in process capability when testing alternative versions of the
fab with different number of fabrication tools. Also, theoretical
and simulation work in modeling and optimization of reentrant lines has been reported by Kumar and Kumar & Kumar
in [28] and [29], respectively. Similarly, Mittler, Schöeming,
and Gerlich presented in [41], [42] the results of simulations
of large wafer fab models, based on industrial data, and the
impact of different dispatching rules. The results demonstrated
that the performance in the fab (e.g., cycle time, variance
of cycle time) is dependent on the fab configuration, load,
and type of products being produced. In addition, Bai et.
al. reported in [4] the use of simulation models to compare
scheduling strategies designed to reduce cycle times and
Work-In-Process (WIP) inventories as well as to maintain the
Another interesting application of simulation tools in the
front-end process is presented by Narahari et. al. in [44]. Here
the effect of the so-called hot lots, wafer lots with a very high
priority in production, through simulation studies is discussed.
Results from simulations studies in this body of work demonstrated the negative effect that hot lots have in the cycle time
of standard lots. In addition, analysis and modeling procedures
are proposed with the objective to design control strategies that
are able to deal with hot lots. Also, in the area of material
handling, Mackulak et. al. discussed in [36] the utilization
of design of experiments and simulation of intrabay layouts
for Automated Material Handling Systems (AHMS). In this
study, simulations were performed to compare performance
of alternative designs. Finally, the optimization of multiple
objectives in wafer fabs by using simulation models is reported
by Gupta & Sivakumar in [18]. In this research, Pareto
solutions are utilized to deal with the problem of multiple
objective optimization of cycle time, machine utilization, and
due date accuracy. As a result, near optimal solutions for
scheduling the wafer fab were obtained, and simulation studies
demonstrated that these solutions worked effectively.
The highest level in the simulation hierarchy corresponds
to the supply chain, which is defined as "...a network consisting of nodes corresponding to facilities where products are
acquired, transformed, stored and sold" [46].
The simulation of supply chains is considered complex and
involves the simulation of the product and information flow
through the different links in the chain [46], [21], [61]: manufacturing facilities (front-end and back-end), transportation
between the different stages in the chain, business processes
(e.g., forecasting, production and inventory planning), and
customer orders (e.g., modeling of actual consumption of
products). Also, many of these components are generally
distributed through different geographical locations that makes
the modeling and simulation process even more difficult.
Simulation tools are utilized as a part of the strategies
for optimization of the supply chain. The main objectives
of the optimization are focused on minimizing all costs incurred across the supply chain and maximizing throughput
while maintaining high levels of customer satisfaction [46].
In addition, a better management of the supply chain is a
key component to improve competitiveness in the current
semiconductor manufacturing market [21]. Simulation at this
level is clearly justified by the high capital investment of the
semiconductor industry that calls for higher levels of utilization in the equipment while having low levels of inventory.
Utilization of simulations of supply chains in semiconductor
manufacturing is recent and still under active research and
development [33], [34]. The need for simulation models has
been pushed by the current globalization of markets and
the need of planning strategies that cover from manufacturing operations through final customer on-time delivery of
products. At the same time, simulation of supply chains is
a complex and computationally intensive task that requires
different levels of abstraction and time granularity in the
models being used [46]. One of the main problems in the
simulation of supply chains is focused on the level of detail
required to obtain accurate data from simulation runs. The
accuracy of these simulation models is essential in decisionmaking for the supply chain management. For instance, in
[21] Sanjay et. al. discussed this problem. The results reported
showed that the level of accuracy in the supply chain model
is essential, but at the same time the level of detail increases
the complexity and computational costs associated with the
simulation. Sanjay et. al. also reported in [22] an alternative
to overcome the computational costs through the simulation of
supply chains based on the bottleneck processes in the chain.
Comparisons between detailed models and simplified versions
based on modeling of bottleneck processes are presented and
demonstrated that the latter version produced accurate results
with a lower computational cost. In a more recent work,
Lendermann et. al. reported in [33], [34] the utilization of
distributed simulation of the supply chain under a Higher Level
Architecture (HLA) scheme. This procedure consists of distributing the simulation models of each link in the supply chain
through different locations, and hardware/software platforms.
It has been demonstrated [33], [34] that this procedure allows
the generation of ultra-fast simulations of the supply chain.
For instance, a simulation model of the wafer fab corresponds
to a link in the chain. A proper level of detail in modeling
the wafer fab is required so that the supply chain simulation
model can provide information that can be used in a reliable
Every component in the supply chain needs to be modeled
properly. In this paper we focus our attention in the modeling
and simulation of the front-end process, specifically the wafer
fab. As Sivakumar mentioned in [58], the semiconductor wafer
fab is one of the most complex components in the chain,
and its simulation is essential for decision-making in the
manufacturing process. The importance of this component is
reaffirmed by the need of accurate simulation models of wafer
fabs in the simulation of the supply chain. Therefore, in the
next sections we discuss in detail a proposed framework for
modular simulation of semiconductor wafer fabs.
In this section we describe a framework for modular simulation of semiconductor fabs, which is based on the general
framework presented by McLean & Leong in [38].
The main motivation of the framework presented in [38]
was the non-existence of standards for simulation models and
data in several industry sectors. A clear example is the current
semiconductor industry where there is no standardization in
the models and data utilized in the simulation of the fabs. The
lack of standards usually increases the amount of work and
costs involved in the modeling and simulation process.
The primary objective of the framework proposed by
McLean & Leong [38] was to provide a scheme for the
identification of the modules and data required to address
various types of simulation problems. In addition, they suggest
that a standard framework could facilitate the exchange of
data, models, and case studies between commercial simulation
software, and therefore, accelerate and facilitate the overall
simulation process. For instance, the development of standard
templates or modules for different types of case studies would
be a step to minimize duplication of simulation work, reducing
the modeling process and costs. The framework proposed in
[38] includes the following four general elements: (1) Market
Sector, (2) Hierarchical Modeling Levels, (3) Simulation Case
Figure 2 illustrates the standard framework as a triangle
with different levels or layers corresponding to the four main
elements. The top layer is represented by the Market Sector
The market sector, hierarchical modeling levels, and simulation case studies layers can be utilized for identification
purposes rather than for specification. For instance, we identify the semiconductor industry as the market sector in the
framework. The hierarchical modeling levels of interest are
the structure and elements utilized in the production process
Before specifying the models and data that will be required
to build the simulation model, it is possible to identify the
Hierarchy in the Proposed Framework for Standard Modular
simulation case studies that will provide valuable support for
decision-making in the fabrication operations. The process of
designing the case studies can be considered as a recurrent process. In other words, after building a simulation model future
modifications or adjustments could be necessary according to
the simulation objectives. The layer of simulation case studies
will provide the level of detail that the simulation model needs
to provide, and therefore, will determine the structure of the
The last layer, corresponding to models and data, serves to
identify and specify the items required to build the simulation
model. For example, operations, resources, and production
flows required in the production process can be specified in
The following sections present details of the application of
this framework for simulation of semiconductor fabs. In the
first part we present the identification layers in the context
of semiconductor wafer fabrication. The second part discusses
and presents a preliminary structure of the elements that could
be considered in the layer of models and data utilized for
VI. I DENTIFICATION L AYERS : M ARKET S ECTOR ,
H IERARCHICAL M ODELING L EVELS , AND S IMULATION
The first element of the proposed framework in [38] is
utilized to identify the market sector that corresponds in this
case to the semiconductor manufacturing industry. The market
sector identification is located on the highest layer of the
framework, and it will determine the specification of the
As mentioned in section III, in the semiconductor industry
different simulation processes are conducted at different levels.
We focus our interest in an important area of simulation
in the front-end process, which is the simulation of the
B. Hierarchical Modeling Levels: the semiconductor fab
The second layer serves to specify the levels of detail
required in the modeling and simulation of the semiconductor
Production Line: Corresponds to the specification of the
stations or tool families utilized in the production process
and how the process flow is specified for each part
Human Resources: Process operators and maintenance
technicians are considered human resources that are generally included in the modeling of semiconductor fabs.
Station: In a semiconductor fab, stations are composed
by a group of tools assigned to a specific operation (e.g.,
lithography, metal deposition) in the production process.
Usually, these stations are integrated by tools that perform
the same operation (e.g., tool families).
Equipment: Machine tools or simply tools are the elements that integrate the stations. In semiconductor fabs,
the tools are specialized equipment with different levels
of complexity (e.g., from single to multiple chamber
tools). Other equipment considered in this category are
transporters (e.g., autonomous guided vehicles (AGV’s))
Process: The lowest level in this hierarchical modeling
specifies the operational parameters at the processing
level in the fabrication tools (e.g., tool processing time,
scheduling strategies, wafer starts per week, failure and
repair statistics, probability distributions). These parameters are utilized to represent, in the simulation model, the
physical semiconductor wafer fabrication process (e.g.,
lithography, deposition, ion implantation).
C. Simulation Case Studies in Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication: A Preliminary List
Simulation case studies are utilized to answer questions
about how certain modifications in the current fab simulation
model can affect the production performance (e.g., throughput,
cycle time) [39]. From the general framework in [38], we
identified the following categories as potential components for
a modular case study element in the simulation framework:
• Scheduling: the study of the effect of using different
strategies to schedule jobs (e.g., dispatching rules [47])
at the tool stations is a common question that can be
answered with these type of case studies. The scheduling
also known as shop floor control has been and is still
being widely studied. For instance, see [65], [28], [29],
[63]. Other analyses that can be included in this type of
case study are: hot lots [44] and input regulation (e.g.,
• Plant Layout: The impact of physical distribution of
stations into the fab can also be subject to simulation experiments. For instance, travel times of materials between
the stations and material handling can be analyzed, and
different configurations of fab layouts can be evaluated
through simulation case studies. An example of this type
• Capital Equipment: the effect of variation in capital
equipment can be analyzed under simulation case studies.
These experiments can be used to evaluate variations in
production capacity as well as in costs related with the
production process [17]. For instance, simulations can be
performed to evaluate the economic impact of replacing
tools with different failure probability distributions (e.g.,
different Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF)).
• Work Force: Operators and/or workers are usually modeled in semiconductor fab models. Therefore, the analysis
of the impact of changes in workers schedules (e.g., availability), skill levels (e.g., providing training), contract
workers, etc.; can provide useful scenarios for decisionmaking.
• Product Mix: in many semiconductor fabs the production
is diversified and several products are produced. Questions that can be answered by this case study can be:
What release rate or input regulation strategy is utilized
• Process Capability: evaluation of production capabilities
is important in semiconductor fab operations to project
workloads as well as to evaluate capacity expansion and
• Material Handling: Advances in computer graphic animation and simulation tools have made possible the study
of the effect of material handling (e.g., Automated Material Handling Systems (AMHS), Autonomous Guided
Vehicles (AGV’s)) in simulation of semiconductor fabs.
Improvements in how the materials are delivered, stored,
retrieved from tools, etc. is also a commonly studied
problem in this industry. For example see [10], [25].
• Maintenance: One of the major sources of stochastic
events in a semiconductor fab is tool down-time due
to failures [62], [63]. Reliability of the tools can be
increased by applying appropriate preventive maintenance
(PM). Therefore, PM scheduling strategies can be evaluated through simulation case studies. Algorithms for
optimal PM scheduling and simulation case studies in
semiconductor manufacturing have been presented in
Other case studies mentioned in [38] that can be included
in this list are: Capacity Analysis, Line Balancing, Cost Estimation, Process Validation, Tolerance Analysis, Ergonomic
Analysis, Tooling, and Inventory. The list presented above is
by no means complete, but it represents a good preliminary
selection of case studies commonly addressed in the semiconductor industry.
The lowest layer in the proposed framework specifies the
model and data required to implement the simulation case
studies. One important objective towards the standardization
of simulation procedures in the semiconductor industry will
be the standardization in the format of model description in
digital formats (e.g., data files). NIST is currently working on
exchange formats for models and data utilized in simulation
of manufacturing systems; for instance, see [32]. This effort
is focused on generating exchange file formats using Unified
Modeling Language (UML) and eXtensible Markup Language
(XML). These efforts are part of the NIST’s SIMA program
We follow the data structure proposed by McLean & Leong
[38] from which we selected the data elements that are
generally required to specify a semiconductor fab model. In
addition, we proposed an additional component denominated
Simulation Control Specifications. The following is the proposed structure for the models and data layer:
The following subsections present details about each group
according to the semiconductor fab modeling and simulation
For modeling and simulation of semiconductor fabs this
group of data provides information about:
• Model Revisions: this segment of data is utilized to
keep tracking of modifications and/or updated data in the
• Data Set Summary: description or summary of the key
• Modeler Comments: this section can be utilized by the
modeler or analyst to include specific details about conditions for the simulation study (e.g., simulation length,
replications, other specific conditions).
• Units of Measurement: the units utilized throughout the
model are specified in this segment. For instance, in
simulation models of semiconductor fabs the following
– Wafers and wafer lots to specify the units being
– Seconds, minutes, and hours as time units.
– Meters for distance units (e.g., fab layout specifications).
– Combination of the above units can be utilized to
specify other quantities; for instance the throughput
rate in a tool could be specified in wafers/hour, or
the meter/second to specify the speed of a transporter
utilized to deliver material between stations.
• Probability Distributions: this set of data is utilized to
specify the type of probability distribution for the random
events in the production process. For instance, the following events that are described by probability distributions
are utilized in modeling and simulating semiconductor
– Tool failures times (e.g., Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) or Mean Time To Fail (MTTF))
– Tool repair times (e.g., Mean Time To Repair
Performance Metrics: these are indexes that are utilized
to measure production performance through simulation
case studies. The following are commonly used metrics
in semiconductor manufacturing processes [29]:
– throughput capacity, and throughput rate
– WIP level (e.g., Work-In-Process inventory)
Details about the resources required in the production
process are identified in this structure. In the case of a
semiconductor fab, the following could be a specification of
∗ Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) or Mean
Time To Fail (MTTF) specifications per tool
– Production operators and preventive maintenance
– Transporters (e.g., autonomous guided vehicles, conveyors, human-based transporters)
∗ Physical specifications (e.g., speed, distance covered)
– Other material handling devices (e.g., robots)
• Skill Definitions: maps the skill levels of operator or technicians with the corresponding process activities (e.g.,
• Operations Definitions: Defines the operation type per
tool station (e.g., lithography, etching).
In general, product mix specifications are indicated in this
level and could include the following structures:
• Parts: define the type of products fabricated in the fab.
– Product associated production sequence, route, or
• Process Plans: specifies the work flow per product or
routing, and other special operations in the production
∗ Step identification (e.g., production step ID number)
· Tool and processing time (e.g., probability distribution parameters)
∗ Batch size if batching operations are required at
the current processing step in the sequence
∗ Rework percentage and rework re-routing specification
∗ Travel times to the next station/step sequence
The data structures in these levels provide details about
calendars of operative activities and work operations in the
• Calendars: identifies shift schedules for operators, and
breaks that can be represented as worker’s availability
• Work: this structure can be utilized to specify scheduling
data or strategies followed for production control (e.g.,
– Wafer starts per month (e.g., lot release rate, arrival time probability distribution) or input regulation
strategies (e.g., Constant WIP (CONWIP) [65], [54]).
– Dispatching rules or scheduling strategies per tool
This section presents the physical distribution of the different elements that integrate the semiconductor fab (e.g.,
tool stations, transporters, parts transportation paths). This
structure "...defines the location of reference points within
the site or facility, area boundaries, paths, and part objects.
It contains reference pointers to external graphic files that
may use appropriate graphic standards to further define these
Definition of the fab layout and its utilization with graphic
interfaces are mainly utilized for animation purposes. For
instance, this can be directly applied to the study of Automated
Material Handling Systems (AMHS) strategies and equipment
allocation in the shop floor (e.g., evaluate the impact in
production performances from different layout configurations).
An important piece of information about the simulation
model are the details for running the simulation. This section
includes details about simulation length, warm-up periods,
number of replications, and other details relevant to the control
of the simulation runs. This information is valuable for future
validation and verification of the model if it is implemented
under different simulation engines. Validation and verification
is a key step in the simulation process that is beyond the
presentation of the proposed framework for simulation. Useful
guidelines and procedures for verifying and validating simulation models are presented by Law & Kelton in [31].
The next sections present three different examples to illustrate how the proposed simulation framework is utilized to
present the necessary information required for modeling and
simulating a semiconductor fab. In addition, simulation case
studies were performed for each example and according to
the generic case studies list presented in section V. All the
examples presented in this paper correspond to a summary of
the case studies reported by Li in [35]. We refer the reader to
the latter reference for further and detailed versions of these
– WIP level (e.g., Work-In-Process inventory).
Tables I, II, and III show details about the resources utilized
VIII. E XAMPLE 1: I NTEL F IVE -M ACHINE M INI - FAB
In this section we present an example of the application of
the proposed simulation framework discussed in sections IV,
V, and VI. This example corresponds to a simple configuration
of the Intel Five-Machine Six Step Mini-fab benchmark [24],
In this example we depart from the Models and Data layer
in the proposed framework. We assume that the other layers in
the framework have been properly specified in section IV. In
addition, a simple simulation case study about the impact of
the work force in the fab production performance is presented
in the last subsection. The objective of this simulation example
is to illustrate a specific type of case study that can be
performed according to the proposed simulation framework
The following are the general specifications for the Minifab:
– Neither maintenance technicians nor operator’s
breaks are modeled in this model version.
– Also, no buffer sizes are modeled for the tool stations.
– Batch of lots can be mixed in any combination of
– This is a five-machines six-step manufacturing process.
– There are 3 different products in which one of them
– This model does not include rework nor travel times.
– An operator is always required for loading and
unloading the tools. During the time that the machine
is processing the operators are not required.
– Wafer lots is the unit being processed by tools.
– Tool failures times: uniform distribution.
– Tool repair times: uniform distribution.
T OOL S TATION FAILURES AND R EPAIR S TATISTICS FOR THE Mini-fab
U(a,b): Uniform distribution in the interval [a,b].
The Mini-fab model has the following specifications for
– Number of parts (products): 2 standard products (Part
– Product associated production sequence or route: 1
unique sequence or process flow for every product.
– Lot size per product: the basic unit is lots, therefore
Process Plans: Table IV presents the process plan that
consists of the tool stations, corresponding processing
step, and processing time. In addition, Table V shows
the setup, batching, load, and unload details per station.
the values for the performance indexes resulting from the
S IMULATION R ESULTS FOR THE W ORK F ORCE E XPERIMENT USING THE
**The given processing time for Station 1 is per batch.
S ETUP, L OAD , U NLOAD T IMES , AND B ATCHING S PECIFICATIONS FOR THE
LC: Avg. Lots completed, CT: Avg. Cycle time (h), CT STD: Cycle time standard
deviation (h), WIP: Work-In-Process (lots), C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval half-length.
S IMULATION R ESULTS FOR THE W ORK F ORCE E XPERIMENT USING THE
SU: Setup time (min), LD: Load time (min),
ULD: Unload time (min), BS: Batch size (lots)
LC: Avg. Lots completed, CT: Avg. Cycle time (h), CT STD: Cycle time standard
deviation (h), WIP: Work-In-Process (lots), C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval half-length.
Calendars: operations are 24 hours, 7 days. A day-work
is divided in two shifts of 12 hours each
– Wafer starts: Part 1: 51 lots per week; Part 2: 30 lots
– Dispatching rules or scheduling strategies per stations: First-In-First-Out (FIFO).
F. Simulation Case Studies: Impact of Work Force in Production Performance
In this simple example, the Mini-fab model was utilized
to compare the impact in production performance when an
operator is added into the process. We consider the base model
according to the definitions for this model previously presented
in this section. The alternative system corresponds to a model
including an extra operator. In other words we define the
number of operators in the alternative systems as follows: 2
The simulation engine utilized to implement the model
and perform the simulation runs was AutoSched AP [7],
[48], [8]. In addition, the simulation conditions are the same
as those indicated in the subsection of Simulation Control
Tables VI and VII present the simulation results for the base
and alternative models, respectively. Also, Figure 3 depicts
P1: Part 1 P2: Part 2 CT: Avg. Cycle Time (h)
Fig. 3. Performance indexes for the Base and Alternative Models of the
The results clearly indicated that an improvement in the
cycle time and reduction in the average WIP levels are
obtained by adding one more operator in the fab. The cycle
time is decreased about 6 hours in average for both products,
while the average WIP level is reduced in about two lots for
product 1, and one lot for product 2. Also, the variation in
the cycle time is reduced as it is indicated in the standard
The second example corresponds to the denominated Measurement and Improvement of Manufacturing Capacities (MIMAC) data set 1 or simply MIMAC 1. This and other datasets
of semiconductor fab models have been made available for
research and academic purposes by the Modeling and Analysis
of Semiconductor Manufacturing Laboratory (MASMLab) at
Similarly to Example 1, we present the Models and Data
layer for the MIMAC 1 model. The last subsection includes a
simulation case study in scheduling, which consisted in the
evaluation of three different dispatching rules for the tool
General specifications for the MIMAC 1 model, as given
in [37], are summarized below. However, some revisions were
made to the model in [37] in order to perform the simulation
– The lot release rates for the two products indicated
in the original model in [37] caused instability in
the wafer fab simulation model. Therefore, after a
capacity analysis (for details see [35]) new release
rates were calculated to obtain a stable behavior of
the system. These rates were modified as follows:
in the first product the rate changed from 3.02402
to 3.22402 hours between a lot release, and for the
second product the rate was increased from 6.04788
– This manufacturing process includes 83 tool stations
– From the original 83 tool stations and 265 tools, only
68 stations and 212 tools are really utilized in this
– There are 2 types of products (Part 1 and Part 2).
– There are 210 processing steps to fabricate Part 1,
– The average percentage of tool downtime is 10.2 %.
– This fab model has 32 operator groups from which 5
are not utilized, therefore, only 26 groups are really
– An operator is only required for the setup operations
– Units being processed can be either wafers or lots.
Tool failures times: exponential distribution.
Tool repair times: exponential distribution.
– WIP level (e.g., Work-In-Process inventory).
Tables VIII, IX, X, and XI present the details for the
resources in the MIMAC 1 model. Given that the model
includes 68 stations and 212 tools, only a partial presentation
of resources is provided here as a manner of exemplifying the
utilization of the proposed simulation framework.
N UMBER OF T OOLS A SSIGNED PER S TATION FOR THE MIMAC 1
O PERATORS A SSIGNATION PER T OOL S TATION FOR THE MIMAC 1
T OOL S TATION FAILURES AND R EPAIR S TATISTICS FOR THE MIMAC 1
L OAD , U NLOAD T IMES , AND B ATCHING S PECIFICATIONS FOR THE
The MIMAC 1 model has the following specifications for
– Number of parts (products): 2 (Part 1 and Part 2).
– Product associated production sequence or route: 2
routes for the corresponding parts being produced.
Process Plans: Tables XII and XIII present the process
plan that consists of the tool stations, corresponding
processing step, processing time, and type of unit being
processed. In addition, Table XIV shows the batching,
LD: Load time (h), ULD: Unload time (h), Min. BS: Minimum batch size (wafers),
Calendars: operations are 24 hours, 7 days. A day-work
is divided in two shifts of 12 hours each.
∗ Product 1: one lot every 3.22402 hours (2501
∗ Product 2: one lot every 6.44788 hours (1250
– Dispatching rules or scheduling strategies per stations: First-In-First-Out (FIFO.)
PT: Processing time, UP: Unit being processed.
F. Simulation Case Studies: Impact of Dispatching Rules in
PT: Processing time, UP: Unit being processed.
In this section we present a case study in the scheduling category. We evaluated the impact of three different
dispatching rules on fab performance index measures. The
three dispatching rules studied were: First-In-First-Out (FIFO),
Shortest Processing Time (SPT), and Least Processing Time
In the FIFO rule the first lot arriving to a tool station is the
first lot in being served once a tool is available for processing.
When the SPT is utilized, the next lot being processed is the
lot with the minimum processing time. Finally, the LTR rule
selects the lot with the minimum sum of processing times
remaining from the subsequent operations. Additional details
about these dispatching rules can be found in [47].
The simulation conditions are those specified in the Simulation Control Specifications subsection. In addition, the
simulation engine utilized was AutoSched AP.
Tables XV, XVI, and XVII present the simulation results for
each of the dispatching rules. Also, Figure 4 depicts the value
of the performance indexes obtained from the simulation.
S IMULATION R ESULTS U SING FIFO D ISPATCHING R ULE : MIMAC 1
S IMULATION R ESULTS U SING LTR D ISPATCHING R ULE : MIMAC 1
LC: Lots completed, CT: Cycle time (h), CT STD: Cycle time standard deviation (h),
WIP: Work-In-Process (lots), B.I.%: Bottleneck station idle percentage,
AVG: Average value, C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval half-length.
LC: Lots completed, CT: Cycle time (h), CT STD: Cycle time standard deviation (h),
WIP: Work-In-Process (lots), B.I.%: Bottleneck idle percentage,
AVG: Average value, C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval half-length.
S IMULATION R ESULTS U SING SPT D ISPATCHING R ULE : MIMAC 1
LC: Lots completed, CT: Cycle time (h), CT STD: Cycle time standard deviation (h),
WIP: Work-In-Process (lots), B.I.%: Bottleneck station idle percentage,
AVG: Average value, C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval half-length.
P2 CT P1 WIP P2 WIP P1 CTSD P2 CTSD B.I.%
P1: Part 1 P2: Part 2 CT: Avg. Cycle Time (h) WIP: Avg. Work-In-Process (lots)
CTSD: Avg. Cycle Time Standard Deviation B.I.%: Bottleneck Idle Percentage
Fig. 4. Performance indexes when utilizing FIFO, SPT, and LTR dispatching
As observed in Tables XV, XVI, and XVII, as well as
in Figure 4, the best performance in cycle time for Part 1
is obtained under the LTR dispatching rule. For Part 2, the
best performance in cycle time is given by the application of
the SPT rule. The same pattern is obtained for the average
WIP. The lowest variation in the cycle time over the two type
of parts is obtained with the SPT rule, such as the standard
The last example corresponds to the fab model of a R&D
facility of Hewlett-Packard developed by L. W. Wein, see [65]
for details. For short we denominated the model as HP-Wein
model. In addition, the data set for this model is available from
In this example we included a case study in scheduling,
which consisted of the evaluation of different release rates. The
corresponding presentation of this case study and its analysis
The following are the general specifications for the HP-Wein
– No modifications in the model are reported.
– This is a manufacturing process that includes 24
tool stations consisting of single or multiple identical
– There are 172 processing steps to fabricate the product.
– Operators and travel times are not modeled.
– The fab model includes one bottleneck station corresponding to the lithography process. This tool station
– Tool failures times: exponential distribution.
– Tool repair times: exponential distribution.
– WIP level (e.g., Work-In-Process inventory.)
Tables XVIII, and XIX present the details for the resources
The HP-Wein model has the following specifications for
– Product associated production sequence or route: 1
route for the corresponding part being produced.
– Lot size per product: basic unit being processed is
a wafer lot, there is no lot size specification. In
Process Plans: Table XX presents the process plan that
consists of the tool stations, corresponding processing
step, and processing time. Given that a total of 172
processing steps are required to fabricate a part, a partial
presentation of the process plan is provided.
Calendars: operations are 24 hours, 7 days. A day-work
is divided in two shifts of 12 hours each.
– Wafer starts: one lot every 42.3769 hours.
– Dispatching rules or scheduling strategies per stations: First-In-First-Out (FIFO).
N UMBER OF T OOLS A SSIGNED PER S TATION FOR THE HP-Wein
T OOL S TATION FAILURES AND R EPAIR S TATISTICS FOR THE HP-Wein
P ROCESS P LAN FOR P RODUCT 1 IN THE HP-Wein
S IMULATION R ESULTS FOR THE I NPUT R EGULATION E XPERIMENT USING
RR: Release rate (h/lot), CT: Avg. Cycle time (h), B.I. %: Bottleneck station idle
F. Simulation Case Studies: Impact of Different Lot Release
This case study is part of the generic category of scheduling,
specifically input regulation using a deterministic release rate.
It has been demonstrated in [65], [51] that a constant release
rate produces better performance in cycle time mean and
variance than release rates based on poisson or uniform distributions. In this experiment we performed simulations using the
HP-Wein model varying the lot release rate from 36.3769 to
46.3769 hours in increments of 1 hour. This generated a total
of 11 different scenarios which corresponds to a variation of
85 % to 100 % of the maximum production capacity of the fab.
Our objective was to analyze the impact of these variations in
The simulation engine utilized was AutoSched AP, and
the simulation conditions are as indicated in the Simulation
Table XXI lists the results from the simulation and indicates
the average cycle time (CT), the percentage of idleness (BS
% idle) in the bottleneck station (PHGCA_LITHOGRAPHY),
standard deviation (STD) of cycle time, average number of
lots completed (LC), and the average work-in-process (WIP)
inventory. In addition, Table XXII lists the half-length of the
confidence intervals at 95 % of confidence for the statistics
From Table XXI, it can be observed that the maximum
throughput is obtained with a release rate of 38.3769 hours
per lot. Under these conditions the bottleneck station is utilized
approximately 94 % of the time, but the cycle time is increased
around 1000 hours. Moreover, the minimum WIP and cycle
time is obtained for a release rate of 47.3769 hours per lot.
The results presented in Table XXII also demonstrated that
there was no statistical difference in the performance when the
release rate being utilized is large. For instance, the release
rates of 47.3769 and 46.3769 hours produced confidence
intervals that are overlapping for the cycle time, showing no
statistical difference. This fact can also be demonstrated by
percentage, STD: Standard deviation, WIP: Work-In-Process (lots).
S TATISTIC C ONFIDENCE I NTERVALS FROM THE I NPUT R EGULATION
RR: Release rate (h/lot), CT: Avg. Cycle time (h), C.I.: 95 % t-confidence interval
half-length, STD: Standard deviation, WIP: Work-In-Process (lots).
An application of a framework for standard modular simulation (proposed by NIST) of semiconductor fabs has been
presented. A preliminary list of elements that integrate this
framework in the context of modeling of semiconductor fabs
have been discussed. The list of elements presented is by no
means considered complete and further additions are possible.
The specific application of the proposed framework was
illustrated by presenting three examples of different semiconductor fab models: the Mini-fab, MIMAC 1, and the HPWein model. In the Mini-fab model a case study in work
force impact in production performance was presented. For
the MIMAC 1, a scheduling case study where three different
dispatching rules were compared in production performance
was discussed. Finally, by utilizing the HP-Wein model, a
simulation experiment comparing different release rates was
Extension and improvement of the proposed framework
is possible and necessary. For instance, an important factor
to consider is how technological changes could affect the
utilization of the standard. A preliminary answer for this
question can be the application of an active updating process.
Therefore, technological changes in the semiconductor manufacturing industry will be considered by updated versions of
the standard. Similarly, other issues such as the levels of detail
required in the modeling and simulation need to be reviewed
Currently, our efforts are being conducted in the identification and development of generic case studies for simulation
of semiconductor wafer fabrication. Our future research is
focused on the improvement of the proposed framework as
well as the incorporation of the work being conducted by NIST
towards the standardization of data formats (e.g., use of UML
The simulation case studies presented in this paper were
conducted using AutoSched AP [7], [48], [8] as the simulation
tool. This does not imply recommendation or endorsement by
the authors or NIST, nor does it imply that this simulation tool
is necessarily the best available for the purpose.
[1] P. Agrawal and W. J. Dally, "A hardware logic simulation system,"
IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits
and Systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 19-29, 1990.
[2] F. L. Atherton and W. R. Atherton, Wafer Fabrication: Factory Performance and Analysis, Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
[3] M. Aybar, K. Potti, and T. Lebaron, "Using simulation to understand
capacity constraints and improve efficiency on process tools," in Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. Yücesan, C.H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, Pistcataway, New Jersey:
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 2002, pp. 1431-1435.
[4] S. X. Bai and S. B. Gershwin, "Scheduling manufacturing systems with
work-in-process inventory control: Reentrant systems," OR Spektrum,
[5] S. Bhatnagar, E. Fernandez-Gaucherand, M. C. Fu, Y. He, and S. I.
Marcus, "A markov decision process model for capacity expansion and
allocation," in Proc. 38th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control,
Phoenix, AZ, December, 1999, pp. 121-125.
[6] T. Binder, A. Hossinger, and S. Selberherr, "Rigorous integration of
semiconductor process and device simulators," IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 22, no.
[7] Brooks Automation, AutoMod (AutoSched AP). [Online]. Available:
http://www.autosched.com/products/automod/automod.asp
[8] Brooks Automation, Corp. AutoSched AP. [Online]. Available:
[9] R. E. Bryant, "Symbolic boolean manipulation with ordered binary
decision diagrams," ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 293318, 1992.
[10] E. Campbell and J. Ammenheuser, "300 mm factory layout and material handling modeling: phase II report," Tech Transfer Document #
[11] A. Chikamura, K. Nakamae, and H. Fujioka, "Verification of wafer test
process simulation in VLSI manufacturing system and its application,"
IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E82C, no. 6, pp. 1013-1017, 1999.
[12] M. Choi, L. Milor, and L. Capodieci, "Simulation of the circuit performance impact of lithography in nanoscale semiconductor manufacturing," in Proceedings of the International Conference on Simulation of
Semiconductor Processes and Devices SISPAD, 2003, pp. 219-222.
[13] R. W. Dutton and A. J. Strojwas, "Perspectives on technology and
technology-driven CAD," IEEE Transactions on Computer Aided Design
of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1544-1560, 2000.
[14] C. C. Enz and Y. Cheng, "MOS transistor modeling for RF IC design,"
IEEE Transactions on Solid-State Circuits, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 186-201,
[15] J. W. Fowler, M. C. Fu, L. W. Schruben, S. Brown, F. Chance, S.
Cunningham, C. Hilton, M. Janakiram, R. Stafford, and J. Hutchby,
"Operational modeling & simulation in semiconductor manufacturing,"
in Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. D.J.
Medeiros, E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. Manivannan, 1998, pp.
[16] J. W. Fowler, 2004, private communication.
[17] N. S. Grewal, A. C. Bruska, T. M. Wulf, and J. K. Robinson, "Integrating
targeted cycle-time reduction into the capital planning process," in Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. D.J. Medeiros,
E.F. Watson, J.S. Carson and M.S. Manivannan, 1998, pp. 1005-1010.
[18] A. K. Gupta and A. I. Sivakumar, "Simulation based multiobjective
schedule optimization in semiconductor manufacturing," in Proceedings
of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. Yücesan, C.-H. Chen,
J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, Pistcataway, New Jersey: Institute
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 2002, vol. 2 , pp. 1862-1870.
[19] I. Hamzaoglu and J. H. Patel, "Test set compaction algorithms for
combinational circuits," IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design
of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 957-963, 2000.
[20] S. Ikeda, H. Ohta, H. Miura, and Y. Hagiwara, "Mechanical stress
control in a VLSI-fabrication process: a method for obtaining the relation
between stress levels and stress-induced failures," IEEE Transactions on
Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 696-703, 2003.
[21] S. Jain, Ch.-Ch. Lim, B.-P. Gan, and Y.-H. Low, "Criticality of detailed
modeling in semiconductor supply chain simulations," in Proceedings
of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. P. A. Farrington, H. B.
Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, and G. W. Evans, 1999, pp. 888-896.
[22] S. Jain, Ch.-Ch. Lim, B.-P. Gan, and Y.-H. Low, "Bottleneck based
modeling of semiconductor supply chain," in Proceedings of the International Conference on Modeling and Analysis of Semiconductor
[23] W. D. Kelton, R. P. Sadowski, and D. T. Sturrock, Simulation with Arena,
[24] K. Kempf. Intel Five-Machine Six Step Mini-Fab Description. [Online].
Available: http://www.eas.asu.edu/~research/intel/papers/fabspec.html
[25] D. Kibira and C. McLean, "Virtual reality simulation of mechanical
production assembly line," in Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. E. Yücesan, C.-H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M.
Charnes, Pistcataway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic
[26] R. Kotcher and F. Chance, "Capacity planning in the face of product-mix
uncertainty," in Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE International Symposium
on Semiconductor Manufacturing Conference, Santa Clara, CA, 1999,
[27] P. R. Kumar, "Re-entrant lines," Queueing Systems: Theory and Applications, vol. 13, pp. 87-110, 1993.
[28] P. R. Kumar, "Scheduling semiconductor manufacturing plants," IEEE
Control Systems Magazine, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 33-40, 1994.
[29] S. Kumar and P. R. Kumar, "Queueing Network Models in the Design
and Analysis of Semiconductor Wafer Fabs," IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 548-561, 2001.
[30] A. La Magna, S. Coffa, and S. Libertino, M. Strobel, and L. Colombo,
"Atomistic simulations and the requirements of process simulator for
novel semiconductor devices," Computational Materials Science, vol.
[31] A. M. Law and W. D. Kelton, Simulation Modeling and Analysis, New
[32] T. Lee and C. McLean, "A neutral information model for simulation
machine shop operations," in Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. S. Chick, P. J. Sánchez, D. Ferrin, and D. J. Morrice,
Pistcataway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers,
[33] P. Lendermann, B. P. Gan, L. F. McGinnis, "Distributed simulation with
incorporated APS procedures for high-fidelity supply chain optimization," in Proceedings of the 2001 Winter Simulation Conference, 2001,
[34] P. Lendermann, N. Julka, B. P. Gan, D. Chen, L. F. McGinnis, and J.
P. McGinnis, "Distributed supply chain simulation as a decision support
tool for the semiconductor industry," Simulation-Transactions of The
Society for Modeling and Simulation International, vol. 79, no. 3, pp.
[35] H. Li, "Application of standard modular simulation to semiconductor
wafer fabrication," Manuscript, University of Cincinnati, OH, June,
[36] G. T. Mackulak and P. Savory, "A simulation-based experiment for
comparing AMHS performance in a semiconductor fabrication facility,"
IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vo. 14, no. 3, pp.
[37] MASMLab. 2004. TestBed. [Online]. Maintained by Modeling and
Analysis of Semiconductor Manufacturing Laboratory, Industrial and
Management Systems Engineering department, Arizona State University,
USA. Available: http://www.eas.asu.edu/~masmlab/ftp.htm
[38] C. McLean and S. Leong, "A framework for standard modular simulation," in Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E.
Yücesan, C.-H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, Pistcataway,
New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 2002, pp.
[39] C. McLean and G. Shao, "Generic case studies for manufacturing
simulation applications," in Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation
Conference, ed. S. Chick, P. J. Sánchez, D. Ferrin, and D. J. Morrice,
Pistcataway, New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers,
[40] C. McLean, Y. T. Lee, G. Shao, and F. Riddick. Manufacturing
Systems Integration Division, Manufacturing Systems Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology. 2005. Shop data model
and interface specification. Technical Report. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sisostds.org/doclib/doclib.cfm?SISO_RID_1005843
[41] M. Mittler, A. K. Schömig, and N. Gerlich. Reducing The Variance
Of Cycle Times In Semiconductor Manufacturing Systems. Technical
http://www3.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/TR/tr109.pdf
[42] M. Mittler and A. K. Schömig, "Comparison of dispatching rules for
semiconductor manufacturing using large facility models," in Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. P. A. Farrington,
H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, and G. W. Evans, vol. 1, 1999, pp.
[43] K. Nakamae, H. Ikeda, and H. Fujioka, "Evaluation of final test
process in 64-Mbit DRAM manufacturing system through simulation
analysis," in Proceedings of the Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing
Conference and Workshop, 2003 IEEEI/SEMI, 2003, pp. 202-207.
[44] Y. Narahari and L. M. Khan, "Modeling the effectof hot lots in semiconductor manufacturing systems," IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor
Manufacturing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 185-188, 1997.
[45] Object Managment Group (OMG). Unified Modeling Language (UML).
[46] I. M. Ovacik and W. Weng, "A framework for supply chain management
in semiconductor manufacturing industry," in Proceedings of the Seventeenth IEEE/CPMT International Electronics Manufacturing Technology
Symposium: Manufacturing Technologies - Present and Future, October,
[47] S. S. Panwalker and W. Iskander, "A survey of scheduling rules,"
Operation Research, vol. 25, pp. 45-61, 1997.
[48] T. Phillips, "AutoSched AP by AutoSimulations," in Proceeding of the
1998 Winter Simulation Conference, 1998, pp. 219-222.
[49] J. D. Plummer, M. D. Deal, and P. B. Griffin, Silicon VLSI Technology,
Englenwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2000.
[50] J. Potoradi, O. S. Boon, and S. J. Mason, "Using simulation-based
scheduling to maximize demand fulfillment in a semiconductor assembly
facility," in Proceedings of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, ed.
E. Yücesan, C.-H. Chen, J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, Pistcataway,
New Jersey: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineer, vol. 2, 2002,
[51] C. Qi and T. K. Tang, "Simulation based cause and effect analysis of
cycle time and WIP in semiconductor safer fabrication," in Proceedings
of the 2002 Winter Simulation Conference, ed. E. Yücesan, C.-H. Chen,
J. L. Snowdon, and J. M. Charnes, Pistcataway, New Jersey: Institute
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 2002, pp. 1130-1137.
[52] J. A. Ramírez-Hernández and E. Fernandez-Gaucherand, "An algorithm
to convert wafer to calendar-based preventive maintenance schedules for
semiconductor manufacturing systems," in Proceedings of the 42 nd IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control, Maui, HI, 2003, pp. 5926-5931.
[53] G. Rappitsch, E. Seebacher, M. Kocher, and E. Stadlober, "SPICE
modeling of process variation using location depth corner models," IEEE
Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 201213, 2004.
[54] O. Rose, "CONWIP-like lot release for a wafer fabrication facility with
dynamic load changes," in Proceedings of the SMOMS ’01 (ASTC ’01),
SEMATECH, "Modeling data standards, version 1.0," Technical Report,
Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), European Electronic Component Association (EECA), Japan Electronics & Information Technology Industries Association (JEITA), Korean Semiconductor Industry
Association (KSIA), and Taiwan Semiconductor Industry Association
(TSIA). International Technology Road Map for Semiconductors (ITRS)
Update 2003. [Online]. Available: http://public.itrs.net
A. I. Sivakumar and C. S. Chong, "A simulation based analysis of cycle
time distribution, and throughput in semiconductor backend manufacturing," Computers in Industry, vol. 45, pp. 59-78, 2001.
A. I. Sivakumar, "Multiobjective dynamic scheduling using discrete
event simulation," International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 154-167, 2001.
T. E. Stanley, E. Campbell, K. Rust, J. Cheatham, J. Maia and R. Wright,
"Linking an AutoSched AP process model with an AutoMod transport
model using MCM in a 300mm fab," presented at the AutoSimulations
K. S. Tsakalis, J. J. Flores Godoy, and A. A. Rodriguez, "Hierarchical
modeling and control for re-entrant semiconductor fabrication lines:
A mini-fab bechmark," in Proceedings of the ETFA’ 97, 6th IEEE
International Conference on Emerging Technology Factory Automation,
S. J. Turner, W. T. Cai, and B. P. Gan, "Distributed supply-chain
simulation using high level architecture," Transactions of the Society
for Computater Simulation, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 98-109, 2001.
R. Uzsoy, Ch. Lee, and L. A. Martin-Vega, "A review of production planning and scheduling models in the semiconductor industry part I: system
characteristics, performance evaluation, and production planning," IIE
R. Uzsoy, Ch. Lee, and L. A. Martin-Vega. 1994. "A review of production planning and scheduling models in the semiconductor industry part
II: shop-floor control," IIE Transactions, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 44-55, 1994.
F. D. Vargas-Villamil, D. E. Rivera, and K. G. Kempf, "A hierarchical
approach to production control of reentrant semiconductor manufacturing lines," IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 11,
L. M. Wein, "Scheduling semiconductor wafer fabrication," IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 115-130,
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Extensible Markup
Language (XML) 1.0 (third edition). [Online]. Available:
J. Yang, and T. S. Chang, "Multiobjective scheduling for IC sort and
test with a simulation testbed," IEEE Transactions in Semiconductor
Manufacturing, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 304-315, 1998.
X. Yao, M. Fu, S.I. Marcus, and E. Fernandez-Gaucherand, "Optimization of preventive maintenance scheduling for semiconductor manufacturing systems: models and implementation," in Proceedings of the 2001
IEEE International Conference on Control Applications, México City,
X. Yao, M. Fu, S.I. Marcus, and E. Fernandez-Gaucherand, "Incorporating production planning into preventive maintenance scheduling in
semiconductor fabs," in MASM 2002, Tempe, AZ, 2002, pp. 84-89.
X. Yao, E. Fernandez-Gaucherand, M. Fu, and S.I. Marcus, "Optimal
preventive maintenance scheduling in semiconductor manufacturing,"
IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, vol. 17, no. 23,
