Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Martin Ringsquandl ∗ Steffen Lamparter ∗∗
∗ Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany (e-mail:
Corporate Technology, Munich, Germany (e-mail:
∗∗∗ Siemens AG,steffen.lamparter@siemens.com).
∗∗∗ Siemens AG, raffaello.lepratti@siemens.com)
Digital Factory, Nuremberg, Germany, (e-mail:
Siemens AG,raffaello.lepratti@siemens.com)
Digital Factory, Nuremberg, Germany, (e-mail:
Abstract: Due to high volatility and dynamics in today’s markets, manufacturers are required
Abstract: Due to high volatility and dynamics in today’s markets, manufacturers are required
accuracy. plans, and furthermore, context also reveals variables that influence estimation
accuracy. plans, and furthermore, context also reveals variables that influence estimation
© 2015, IFAC (International Federation of Automatic Control) Hosting by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Knowledge representation, machine learning, production planning
Keywords: Knowledge representation, machine learning, production planning
Keywords: Knowledge representation, machine learning, production planning
Keywords: Knowledge representation, machine learning, production planning
process, otherwise production plans and schedules become
process, otherwise production plans and schedules become
otherwise production plans and schedules become
The ever increasing volatility and dynamics in today’s inefficient.
The ever increasing volatility and dynamics in today’s With
an increasingly important task, see Mucientes and OPC
to analytical approaches or simulation models, for
estimates of processing times in frequently
estimates of processing times in frequently
dependencies (context) that span across the entire manufacturing changing environments.
cies (context) that span across the entire manufacturing
IFAC (International Federation of Automatic Control)
2083Hosting by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Martin Ringsquandl et al. / IFAC-PapersOnLine 48-3 (2015) 2009–2014
There are well-known machine learning approaches that
deal with the problems of dynamic environments, i.e.
adaptive learning, where the underlying data generation
processes are prone to so-called concept drifts. See Dries
and Rückert (2009) for a general overview of the field.
Closely related to our problem definition, Kiseleva (2013)
discuss the need for context-awareness in predictive models
for user actions on websites. However, there have been no
proposals made so far, which focus on the integration of
context information in manufacturing systems.
Related to the use case in this paper, the problem of
stochastic processing times for shop-floor scheduling and
control (cf. Beck and Wilson (2007)), has been tackled by
incorporating time estimation models for manufacturing
systems using simulation models or queuing theory, as
discussed in Herrmann and Chincholkar (2001). Mucientes
and Vidal (2008) show the importance of incorporating
domain expert knowledge into regression models for processing time estimation. Common downsides of most of
these approaches are that they are meant for offline analysis and require pre-defined simulation models or they
neglect the presence of concept drifts in the underlying
data generation process (e.g. non-stationary distributions
of machine’s processing times) that depend on the current
This section briefly introduces the general ideas of interconnected instances, data and processes and their value
for data analytics, i.e. context-awareness of analytics in
manufacturing operations management. Subsequently, an
exemplary use case in a production planning scenario
Our interpretation of context-aware analytics in manufacturing relates to the context definition of Dey (2001), i.e.
information that can be used to characterize the situation
of an entity. Here, the entities are components of manufacturing systems that affect data analysis. For example,
the temperature monitoring of a welding machine could be
affected by situational characteristics like current product
type, the currently used welding rod, etc. If temperature
monitoring behaves significantly different for two product
types, it should be aware of its context.
Technically, we introduce such context as unified semantic
data model, more precisely, as a (Description Logic-based)
knowledge base comprising terminological and assertional
knowledge, denoted as O = T , A. This data model serves
as a semantic integration of all systems and data sources
at MOM layer, e.g. common master data semantics in
MES and PLM. Here, the TBox T defines a common
terminology and holds for example knowledge about plant
topologies: Robot  Equipment, which means that every
component of type Robot is also of type Equipment.
This can be more conveniently expressed –relating to
the W3C Resource Description Framework (RDF) 1 –
in semantic triple form: Robot, subclassOf, Equipment,
where Robot is the subject, subclassOf is a property and
The ABox A specifies assertions about concrete instances
of the types defined in T . For example, device type information: Robo-1, type, Robot,
Robo-1, observedProperty, Temperature. The last triple
relates a concrete individual Robo-1 with an observation
named Temperature via the property observedProperty.
See Figure 1 for an exemplary manufacturing context
model. Context types (classes) are annotated with a yellow
circle, concrete individuals with purple diamonds. Moving
from the model on the left hand side to the right indicates a
context change, switching production from P1 to P2. Such
model changes can be obtained, for example, via an OPC
UA client-sever architecture that distributes information
In formal language, given a set of analytic models A =
{M1 , M2 , ..., Mk } that can be employed for the same task,
where each model is assigned a local context, denoted
OM1 , OM2 , ..., OMk , our goal is to find a mapping F from
every possible context to analytic model.
As the data stream evolves, this function is necessary to
find the best fitting analytic model for a given situation, for
example, we want to pick the best temperature monitoring
model M for a given context O. Equations 2 show this
where M is the optimal analytic model with respect
to some performance criterion, O is the current global
For a detailed description of the problem setting of
context-aware analytic models in MOM see Ringsquandl
To make things more transparent, consider a manufacturing system like the one in Figure 1, where an MES
controls several machines in a job shop production environment. Since the machine’s processing times are not fixed,
the MES uses simple estimates of the machine’s average
processing times for job shop scheduling and dispatching. However, due to frequent changeovers, maintenance
events, and high variance of materials for different product types, these average estimates are imprecise, which
ultimately leads to inefficient and non-optimal scheduling
To overcome this shortcoming, the processing time estimator (analytic model ) should become aware of changeovers,
Looking at the left data model in Figure 1, the ABox
Robo-1, observedProperty, Temperature , ...
From this context, we know that Robo-1 exhibits the
properties Temperature, Workload, and ProcessingTime
Martin Ringsquandl et al. / IFAC-PapersOnLine 48-3 (2015) 2009–2014
Fig. 1. Use case context model - left to right: production changes from product P1 to P2
and currently produces product P1. The model on the right
hand side shows a different context, in which product P2
is produced – the remaining context stays unchanged.
connections on schema level. This section describes the
proposed context-aware analytic framework within MOM
Restricted © Siemens AG 2015. All rights reserved
Although it seems straightforward to monitor process
variables such as machine’s processing times and ask
engineers to manually specify the kind of events that need
cautious treatment, there are several pitfalls to consider:
The framework’s architecture is depicted in Figure 2 and
• Context-aware Analytics: These are analytic models (e.g. simple monitoring rules, regression models,
etc.) that are deployed using the semantic data model
• Context Broker: This component is responsible
for the distribution of context information. It holds
the current global context knowledge base and also
propagates context changes (e.g. production switch
• Context Knowledge Base: This knowledge base is
a unified semantic data model that integrates data
from different systems across the manufacturing process. We denote such data in the form of semantic triples s, p, o (subject, predicate, object, e.g.
• Concept Drift Verification: On-line data analysis
in manufacturing requires detection of abnormalities,
so called concept drifts. For example, an abruptly
increasing error in the processing time estimator of
section 3.3. This component is used to verify that a
particular context change caused a concept drift.
• Data Sources: Context information is obtained from
several types of systems including PLM, MES, and
ERP. Their data needs to be integrated via standardized information models, like AutomationML,
B2MML, and OPC UA. This data is then mapped
• Unpredictable Events: Events that influence analytics, but cannot be foreseen even by domain experts,
might corrupt decision making. Hence, such events
have to be learned bottom-up (from causing situation
• Dynamic/Flexible Manufacturing: In frequently
changing environments (varying orders, changed suppliers, exchanged devices) manual reconfiguration of
analytics becomes inefficient, just like manual reconfiguration of production (cf. Plug ’n’ Produce)
• Recurring Situations: Some situational changes
might re-occur over and over, e.g. switching production back and forth between two product variants.
Therefore, knowledge (lessons learned) about previous event occurrences should be available as soon as
In all of the previous scenarios, knowledge about context,
i.e. interconnected data across the entire manufacturing
process, can help to improve analytic applications. Therefore, we propose a framework that automatically integrates
semantic context information into the deployment of analytic models and their dynamic adaption to changing
Context-awareness does not simply mean use more data, it
rather stresses the importance of meta-data – the semantic
In subsequent section, it is assumed that a unified context
knowledge base exists and data sources have already
been integrated and semantically aligned. Clearly, this is
still a challenging task, but since this mainly depends
Martin Ringsquandl et al. / IFAC-PapersOnLine 48-3 (2015) 2009–2014
Fig. 2. Context broker architecture for semantic manufacturing data integration and distribution
on proprietary system architectures and landscapes of
manufacturing systems, we will deliberately skip it.
As defined in section 3.1, every analytic model M keeps
track of a specific subset of the global context. The notion
behind this is that M holds references to the context
information of its input features. This way, changing
context triples can be added dynamically as new input
features by following connections in the context knowledge
Tracking of such evolving context information mainly
(1) detection of recurring situations, where it is known
that a particular analytic model performs well,
(2) adapt analytics to changing environments and explain
drifting concepts and their dependencies.
In general, our proposed context-aware analytics follow
the high-level decision tree-like procedure as depicted in
In the starting decision node, continuous concept drift test
notifies about abnormalities. In case of a detected drift,
Example: Suppose our processing time estimator model
M1 for Robo-1 is specified as a linear regression problem:
ŷ = Xβ, where M1 keeps track of the context of its input
features X, in this case the observations Temperature
and Workload like in the left hand side model of Figure
1. Now, after a switch from product P1 to P2 the error
made by M1 increases significantly. Therefore, its tracking context should be extended with the changed triple:
{Robo-1, produces, P1}. Furthermore M1 is updated to
a new model M2 that encodes the changed context as
Fig. 3. General context-aware analytics procedure
the tracking context is checked for changes. If no context
changes happened, the analytic model needs to extend its
tracking context. Otherwise, a new model is trained that
integrates the changed context. As long as no drifts are
detected, the existing analytic model remains untouched.
Concept drift detection uses Page-Hinkley test (see Page
(1954)), also known as cumulative sum control chart
(CUSUM) in statistical quality control, presented in (3).
where  is the current error of a controlled variable (in our
case the error of the analytic model), errors below α are
ignored and λ is the threshold for the cumulative errors.
Page-Hinkley test only requires to keep the errors of our
models in memory, so it does not need large amounts of
historic data detect concept drifts. In order to extend the
initial context of an analytic model, its tracked context
Martin Ringsquandl et al. / IFAC-PapersOnLine 48-3 (2015) 2009–2014
is extended with adjacent triples of the global context
knowledge base. An adjacent triple is a triple s, p, o in the
global context knowledge base, where s or o are tracked
in the model’s context. More vividly, extending context
means a walk through the global context knowledge graph
starting from the currently tracked context nodes. This
way, an analytic model tries to look for context that
justifies previously unexplained concept drifts. The idea
behind these walks through the context knowledge graph
is that semantically connected entities are assumed to be
Similar to the processing time estimation in section 3.3,
we consider a probabilistic job shop scheduling problem as
simulation scenario, where job activities have probabilistic
processing times. The simulation generates data that is
used to predict processing times of machines. For the
purpose of context-aware time estimation, it is sufficient
to cover only one activity that is executed by a particular
machine. Thus, the following data is generated:
• temperature measurement of machine (x1 )
and a binary variable that will simulate changing context:
Here, x1 and x2 , are sampled from an uncorrelated multivariate normal distribution
(40, 10) and Σ = 0 2 . The simulated processing time
variable y then follows a simple formula:
where ω1 and ω2 are random weights in [0, 1] and ω3 =
2(ω1 + ω1 ), specified at the beginning of data generation.
This makes sure that changing the product will have a
significant influence on the processing time.
Suppose a domain expert proposes to use a simple linear regression model to estimate processing time y. The
result is a least-squares linear regression model Mlr that
estimates time ŷ based on machine temperature x1 and
The domain expert does not regard that the product type
could also influence the processing time. So the variable
x3 will later cause a concept drift. Note that this is not
intended to be a realistic prediction example – things are
kept simple to show the application of context-awareness.
The initially tracked context OM is set to the input feature
Robo-1, observedProperty, Temperature ,
The global context knowledge base O looks like the graph
Simulating Concept Drifts An abrupt concept drift means
that, as soon as context changes, it immediately influences
estimates of processing times, therefore such changes have
to be detected to ensure optimal scheduling solutions. In
our setting, this means a changeover to a different product.
In order to simulate this, we switch the hidden product
variable x3 right after the context broker informs about
As simulation switches x3 = 0 to x3 = 1, a corresponding
concept drift can be seen in Figure 4, at sample 250. The
root mean squared error (RMSE) of model Mlr (contextaware linear regression CA-LR) significantly increases and
indicates a concept drift – Page-Hinkley tests positive.
However, since currently product changes are not tracked
by any model, it should be extended accordingly. A walk
through the context knowledge graph starting at the
TemperatureSensor, measures, Temperature
The model now also tracks all changes to the context of
the individuals P2 and TemperatureSensor. As soon as
that includes this information as categorical input feature
production is switched again. The new model is now
trained on every sample, as long as concept drift detection
and is therefore used for prediction from that moment.
Performance As recurring product changeovers happen,
time estimation respects these different situations. Note
the RMSE curve in Figure 4 of the context-aware linear regression variant CA-LR outperforms the standard
not context-aware model LR, as soon as context dependencies are known (after the third product switch).
Furthermore, for comparison, we show the performance
of a state-of-the-art adaptive rule-based regressor called
AM RulesRegressor (cf. Almeida et al. (2013), implemented in the MOA software package 2 ), which also uses
Page-Hinkley test to adapt to changes in the data stream.
It can be seen that this adaptive learner has difficulties
to continuously adapt to recurring situations. Although it
exhibits best performance after the second product switch,
i.e. first recurring situation, it is not reminiscent to subsequent re-occurrences and eventually is outperformed by
CA-LR. As it only adapts once, CA-LR is more stable
in processing time estimation, which means more reliable
and efficient production plans can be implemented. Another important advantage of context-awareness is that
the adaptation is not a black box, it rather explains
situational dependencies, like in this case: the product
context information is explicitly encoded in the new model.
Domain experts can use insights of such context changes
when implementing future production plans or machine
Martin Ringsquandl et al. / IFAC-PapersOnLine 48-3 (2015) 2009–2014
Fig. 4. Estimation model performance comparison based on root mean squared error
Stability of the proposed framework is evaluated with
respect to Page-Hinkley parameters α and λ. Table 1
shows performance for different combinations. Since the
relative standard deviation (RSD) of the RMSE across
these parameter combinations is only about 1% (RSD =
1.14%), we conclude that concept drift detection is stable
In this paper we proposed and showcased a framework
for context-aware analytics within manufacturing systems,
motivated by the need for accurate processing time estimates. We evaluated the proposal in a simulation setting that predicts processing times of machines that are
exposed to frequent changeovers. Evaluation shows that
the framework can be successfully applied and commits
less prediction errors compared to state-of-the-art adaptive learning models in the long run. More accurate estimates of processing times directly influence reliability of
the manufacturing system’s throughput and cycle times,
which are the basis for optimized production planning and
Almeida, E., Ferreira, C., and Gama, J. (2013). Adaptive
model rules from data streams. In Machine Learning
and Know ledge Discovery in Databases, 480–492.
Bauernhansl, T. (2014). Industrie 4.0 in Produktion,
Automatisierung und Logistik. Springer, Wiesbaden.
Beck, J. and Wilson, N. (2007). Proactive Algorithms
for Job Shop Scheduling with Probabilistic Durations.
Journal Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR), 28,
Dey, A.K. (2001). Understanding and using context.
Personal and ubiquitous computing, 5, 4–7.
Dries, A. and Rückert, U. (2009). Adaptive concept drift
detection. In Statistical Analysis and Data Mining,
Herrmann, J.W. and Chincholkar, M.M. (2001). Reducing
throughput time during product design. Journal of
Jovane, F., Westkämper, E., and Williams, D. (2009). The
ManuFuture road: Towards competitive and sustainable
high-adding-value manufacturing. Springer.
Kiseleva, J. (2013). Context mining and integration into
Predictive Web Analytics. Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web companion,
Mucientes, M. and Vidal, J. (2008). Processing times
estimation in a manufacturing industry through genetic
programming. 3rd International Workshop on Genetic
and Evolving Fuzzy Systems, (March), 95–100.
Ringsquandl, M., Lamparter, S., and Lepratti, R. (2014).
Context-aware Analytics in MOM Applications. In 6th
International Workshop on Acquisition, Representation
