Int J Adv Manuf Technol (2004) 23: 768–775
Due-date assignment in wafer fabrication using artificial
Received: 17 October 2002 / Accepted: 31 December 2002 / Published online: 12 March 2004
Abstract Due-date assignment (DDA) is the ﬁrst
important task of shop ﬂoor control in wafer fabrication. Due-date related performance is impacted by the
quality of the DDA rules. Assigning order due dates and
timely delivering the goods to the customer will enhance
customer service and competitive advantage. A new
methodology for lead-time prediction, artiﬁcial neural
network (ANN) prediction is considered in this work.
An ANN-based DDA rule combined with simulation
technology and statistical analysis is developed. Besides,
regression-based DDA rules for wafer fabrication are
modelled as benchmarking. Whether neural networks
can outperform conventional and regression-based
DDA rules taken from the literature is examined.
From the simulation and statistical results, ANNbased DDA rules perform a better job in due-date prediction. ANN-based DDA rules have a lower tardiness
rate than the other rules. ANN-based DDA rules have
better sensitivity and variance than the other rules.
Therefore, if the wafer fab information is not diﬃcult to
obtain, the ANN-based DDA rule can perform better
due-date prediction. The SFM_sep and JIQ in regression-based and conventional rules are better than the
Keywords Due-date assignment Æ Artiﬁcial neural
network Æ Wafer fabrication Æ Simulation Æ Shop ﬂoor
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management,
National Chiao Tung University, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan R.O.C.
due-date prediction rule based on total amount
due-date prediction rule based on slack time
due-date prediction rule based on number of
due-date prediction rule based on current queue
due-date prediction rule based on queue length
regression-based due-date prediction rule considering key factor
regression-based due-date prediction rule considering signiﬁcant factors
A semiconductor chip is a complex device that consists
of miniaturized electronic components and their connections. There are ﬁve steps in semiconductor manufacturing: wafer fabrication, wafer probe, device
assembly, class test and ﬁnal test. Wafer fabrication is
the most technologically complex and capital-intensive
industry. Because the required capital investment is extremely large, improved shop ﬂoor control strategy
could result in a considerable increase in proﬁt. However, it is challenging to develop SFC strategies for wafer
fabs due to the long ﬂow time, ever-changing product
yield, re-entrant feature of the production sequence and
stochastic wafer fab characteristics including machine
failures. Due-date assignment is the ﬁrst important task
in shop ﬂoor control. Due-date related performance is
impacted by the quality of the DDA rules. Assigning
exact due dates and timely delivering the goods to customer will enhance customer service and competitive
advantage. Assigning a due date is a diﬃcult decision.
As a jobs arrive at the shop, due dates are speciﬁed
indicating when the job is expected to be completed.
This assignment is complicated by the fact that each
arriving job has processing needs on various machines in
the shop. Each machine continually experiences diﬀerent
and varying levels of congestion that changes as the jobs
ﬂow through the shop. We consider a new methodology
for lead-time prediction, namely, artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) prediction. ANNs are an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) approach that has been applied to such
general problem areas as prediction, control, data
compression and surface ﬁtting. However, to date, most
applications have been non-managerial scenarios such as
robot control, visual systems and airport bomb detection. We will try to develop an ANN-based DDA rule
combined with simulation technology and statistical
analysis. We will model some regression-based DDA
rules for wafer fabrication as benchmarking. Here, we
attempt to determine if neural networks can outperform
conventional, regression-based due-date assignment
rules in wafer fabrication. The basic methodological
approach employed is the statistical analysis of the data
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
The second section will summarize the relevant literature
on due-date assignment and artiﬁcial neural networks.
The third section discusses the DDA methodology,
including conventional rules, regression-based rules and
ANN-based rules. The fourth section describes the
simulation model and experimental design. In the ﬁfth
section, the statistical results are presented and the
performance of DDA rules will be discussed. The conclusions and suggestions for future study are included in
information and shop-status information. As Cheng and
Gupta [3] noted, many researchers reported improved
performance from these methods. This includes JIQ,
where the due dates are determined based on the current
Computer technology advances have made simulations to be one of the public methods used in due-date
assignment research. Vig and Dooley [5], Weeks [6],
Kaplan and Unal [7] adopted simulations in their research. Simulations allow evaluating the eﬀects of different polices without actual execution.
Analytical methods, based on queuing theory, estimate the mean and standard derivation of order ﬂow
time [8]. Because analytical method assumptions usually
conﬂict with the conditions of the real world, analytical
Statistical analysis uses the regression method [9] and
relation analysis [7] to ﬁnd the relations between order
ﬂow times and other variables. The deﬁciency in statistical
analysis is that past trends may not exist in the future.
Chung et al. [1] used both the simulation method and
queuing theory to estimate ﬂow time and establish
control parameters for ﬂow time. They tried to assign an
achievable due date for an order. Their method used
queuing theory to estimate system status, such as WIP
In recent years, many artiﬁcial intelligent and soft
computing methods have been used for decision support
and forecasting. Philipoom et al. [10] considered a new
procedure for internally setting due dates, namely,
neural network prediction, in a simple ﬂow shop.
The DDA methods used in the related researches can be
Direct procedures assign due dates using such information such as the job characteristics, shop conditions
and dynamic shop condition [2]. This method is convenient and easily computed; however, some parameters
Initially, researchers examined due-date rules that
considered only the job characteristics. These methods
include: TWK, where the due dates are based on the
total amount of works; SLK, where the jobs are given
ﬂow allowances that reﬂect equal waiting times or equal
slacks; and NOP, where the due dates are set according
to the number of operations to be performed in the job.
More recently, another class of due-date assignment
methods was proposed that includes job-characteristic
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) are computing systems that incorporate a simpliﬁed model of the human
neuron, organized into networks similar to those found
in the human brain. ANNs are computer simulations of
biological neurons. They are not programmed; rather,
they learn by example. Neural networks are composed
of processing elements (nodes) and connections. Each
processing element has an output signal that fans out
along the connections to the other processing elements.
Each connection is assigned a relative weight. A node’s
output depends on the speciﬁed threshold and the
transfer function. ANNs are used in pattern recognition,
speech recognition, group technology, scheduling, prediction, optimisation, etc. An ANN is characterized by
its architecture, activation function and learning method. There are many diﬀerent types of ANNs that model
how the human brain uses thought to learn. These ANN
types include the Hopﬁed, Brain-State-in-a-Box, Bidirectional Associative Memory, Boltzmann, Adaptive
Resonance Theory, Hamming, and Hamming and Spation-temporal Networks (p. 7 in [11]).
ANNs are becoming better well known and have
been successfully implemented in manufacturing [12].
For instance, Philipoom et al. [10] used neural network
models to forecast the order due-date in a simple ﬂow
shop manufacturing system. The neural network model
yields better forecasting results than conventional duedate assignment approaches [10]. Their research pointed
out that neural networks could outperform conventional, regression-based due-date assignment rules. They
concluded that neural networks are worthy of further
experimentation as the methodology of choice in duedate prediction. However, order due dates in a ﬂow shop
are stable and the system deviation is smaller than that
Huang et al. [13] constructed an ANN model to
predict production performance for a wafer fabrication
factory. They used a three-layer back-propagation neural network. It allowed more accurate prediction of the
WIP level and move volume in the next time period for
each wafer fabrication operation stage [14]. Using neural
network models to predict wafer fabrication production
1. Neural networks can obtain a probable result even if
2. A well-trained neural network model can provide a
3. Creating a neural network model does not necessitate
understanding the complex relationship among the
Back-propagation neural networks (BPN) are widely
used and produce good results in prediction and pattern
recognition. This work constructed BPN model for order due-date prediction in wafer fabrication. We integrated the artiﬁcial neural network, simulations and
statistical tools for modelling an ANN based due-date
the queuing time in the pre-shop pool). qs is the total
queuing time in the shop (from order released into shop
to order ﬁnished). To provide an exact customer duedate, the manager must establish precise prediction
models for qpsp and qs. Most researchers used regressionbased rules to predict the due-date. One or more factors,
including job characteristics or system status, are considered in building a regression model for due-date
prediction, such as TWK, NOP and JIQ. Regressionbased and ANN-based rules are used to predict the duedate (di) in this research.
total queue time in the pre-shop pool for order i.
Most of the conventional DDA rules consider only one
factor related job characteristic or system status. We will
compare some of these rules with the regression-based
and ANN-based rules. In conventional DDA models,
TWK, JIQ, and JIBQ are public and adapted in our
research. Ragatz and Mabert [13] published a comprehensive comparison of diﬀerent due-date assignment
rules. They considered the performance of eight diﬀerent
assignment rules in a simulated speciﬁc shop. We will
consider two public DDA rules, TWK and JIQ, in our
In general, the internally set due-dates can be represented using the following Eq. 1 [15]:
total queuing time in the system for order i
In Eq. 1,ri and pi are the known nearly constants after
order i arrives. The total queuing time for order (qi) is
the only variable that needs to be estimated for predicting di in Eq. 1. Hence, the manager must establish an
applicable prediction model for qi to precisely predict the
The total queuing time in the system for an order (qi)
consists of two major parts (Eq. 2). First, qpsp is the time
from order acceptance to order release into the shop (i.e.
This method assigns due dates to each order as a multiple of the order’s total processing time. TWK is widely
used in practice. The TWK rule is as follows:
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i
and k is the parameter that reﬂects the expected queue
time that order i will experience in the system. The k
value is estimated based on the regression models.
This method assigns due dates to each order as a multiple of the number of orders in the queue. JIQ is widely
used in practice. The JIQ rule is as follows:
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i
and k is the parameter that reﬂects the expected
queue time that order i will experience in the system.
The k value is estimated based on the regression
This method is used in the system have the signiﬁcant
bottleneck. The due date of each order is assigned just
considering the length of the queue in the bottleneck
workstations. The JIBQ rule is as follows:
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i,
qKFM(PSP) and qKFM(S) are the qpsp and qs estimations in
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i
and k is the parameter that reﬂects the expected queue
time that order i will experience in the system. The k
value is estimated based on the regression models.
KFM_com considers only the key factor. The queuing
time (qi), including qs and qpsp, is forecasted using
a regression model. The due date for each order is
In TWK, JIQ and JIBQ, qi, the total queuing time,
including qpsp and qs, will be predicted considering just a
single factor. Most of the conventional DDA rules
consider just one or more factors building a regressionbased model for predicting the order due date. Owing to
the complexity of wafer fabrication, many factors aﬀect
due-date prediction. Ninety-two factors are considered
in this research in building two regression-based DDA
rules, the key factor prediction model (KFM) and signiﬁcant factor prediction model (SFM). KFM uses the
most important factors under statistics analysis. SFM
The 92 factors can be classiﬁed into three classes
including: the system conditions, order characteristics
and pre-shop-pool (PSP) condition. There are some
subclasses in the system and PSP conditions. The classiﬁcation structure of the prediction factors is shown in
The prediction model for qs was built by choosing
one or more signiﬁcant factors from main classes 1 and
2. The qpsp prediction model considers all of these factors
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i,
qKFM(total) is the qi estimation using the KFM regression
SFM_sep considers the signiﬁcant factors under statistical analysis. The queuing time, qs and qpsp, are forecasted separately. The due date for each order is
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i,
qSFM(PSP) and qSFM(S) are the qpsp and qs equations using
SFM_com considers all of the signiﬁcant factors. The
queuing time (qi), including qs and qpsp, are forecasted
using a regression model. The due date for each order is
KFM_sep considers only the factor that has the highest
statistical analysis correlation coeﬃcient value. The
queuing times, qs and qpsp, are forecasted separately. The
due date for each order is assigned as follows:
Table 1 The classiﬁcation structure of the prediction factors
Where di denotes the assigned due date for order i,
qSFM(total) is the qi estimation using the SFM regression
Using historical data as the input variables, the
regression model and neural network model represent
the properties and variations in a system. When a system
is stable, acceptable forecasting accuracy using the two
models is expected. However, ﬁnding a nonlinear
regression model that can correspond to the historical
data and represent the system’s status is diﬃcult. Many
independent variables must be considered in our case.
Furthermore, some of the data do not ﬁt the basic
assumptions in regression models. Thus, additional data
transformations are necessary to generate our regression
model. Alternatively, creating neural network models
does not have the above conditions. Moreover, in
practice, neural network models can yield better results
In our research, an artiﬁcial neural network, simulations
and statistical analysis tools are integrated to model an
ANN-based DDA rule. The structure of the rule is
shown in Fig. 1. Two types of ANN-based DDA rules
are developed. The ﬁrst rule, ANN_com, adopts one
neural network to predict the wait time (including
waiting time in PSP and waiting time in the shop) in a
wafer fab. The second rule, ANN_sep, uses two neural
networks to predict the wait time in PSP and the shop
separately. The prediction diﬀerence between the
We can collect a lot of data using a simulation experiment in the virtual fab. A data set consists of 92 variances and the real ﬂow time for each lot (containing the
processing time and actual waiting time in the PSP and
shop). This data set was used for training our ANN and
regression model. It is necessary to guarantee statistical
independence among the data before the test is performed. To insure this, only one in every 10 outputs
from the shop simulation was randomly selected to be
included in the sample of 33,000 jobs. The simulation
was designed for a simulation time period of 24 hours a
day and the data was collected after 150 warm days.
To obtain adequate data for modelling the DDA rules a
virtual wafer fabrication system was modelled based on
a real wafer fab. The wafer fab conﬁguration considered
in this study is a wafer fabrication factory in Taiwan.
The fab consists of 53 workstations and 301 machines.
The fab has three types of products with a product mix
of 0.2, 0.35, and 0.45. The entire process requires 16, 18
and 17 loops. That is, a lot visits photolithographic
exposure workstations 16,18, and 17 times. The processing time for a lot is randomly generated from
a uniform distribution between 0.95·MPT and
1.05·MPT, where the MPT (mean processing time) is
given for each workstation. The set-up time is included
in the processing time. The virtual fab takes into account
the downtime, which includes unscheduled breakdowns.
The time between failure and repair for each workstation is randomly generated from exponential distributions with given mean values. A lot (a cassette for
wafers) contains 24 wafers and the transfer time between
workstations is ignored in the simulation. The virtual
wafer fab was built on personal computers with Pentium
III 800 processors using the eM-plant, a simulation
package developed by Tecnomatix Technologies Corp.
Creating an ANN initially involves determining the input variables. Based on the data obtained, a correlation
analysis was performed to help determine the input
variables. Forty-two variables (i.e. the signiﬁcant factors
of due-date prediction) were modelled in our ANN
model. These variables had signiﬁcant correlation with
Our research constructed three BPN prediction models
using the neuralworks professional II/Plus, a neural
network package developed by NeuralWare Technological Corp. The ﬁrst BPN focused on the total wait
time in the system, including the wait time in the PSP
and shop. The other two BPNs focused on predicting the
wait time in the PSP and shop separately.
Modelling a BPN must apply the experimental design
method to determine the optimum BPN structure.
Figure 2 is an example of a three-layer back-propagation neural network. The number of hidden layers in a
BPN model and the number of nodes on the hidden
set is the training data (30,000 records). The second set
(3,000 records) is used for certiﬁcation. To improve the
prediction accuracy diﬀerent data set should be used in
training and certiﬁcation. To assure that the model is
suitable for prediction, on-line retraining is designed in
the BPN model. That is, the model is retrained using
Fig. 2 An example of three-layer back-propagation neural network
layer must be determined. The momentum and learning
rate for the model must also be determined.
Supervised learning is adopted in our BPN model.
The gradient-descent algorithm is employed ([13],
pp 322–328). Through a supervised learning rule, the
collected data set (training data) comprises an input and
an actual target output. The gradient-descent learning
algorithm enables a network to enhance the performance by self-learning. Two phases are available for
computing: forward and backward. In the forward
phase of back-propagation learning the input data pattern is directly passed into the hidden layer. Each element in the hidden layer calculates an activation value
by summing up the weighted inputs and then transforms
the weighted input into an activity level using a transfer
function (the sigmoid function is broadly used). The
resulting activity is allowed to spread through the network to the output layer. If a diﬀerence arises, i.e. an
error term, the gradient-descent algorithm is used to
adjust the connected weights in the backward phase.
This learning process is repeated until the error between
the actual and desired output (target) converges to a
predeﬁned threshold. A trained neural network is expected to predict the output when a new input pattern is
The BPN model training occurs oﬀ-line. The data set is
separated into two parts before model training. The ﬁrst
When the trained BPN is on-line, the ANN based DDA
rules can immediately assist the due-date acknowledgement. When a customer asks for a due-date quote for an
order, a new input pattern consists of all of the input
variables provided to the BPN for predicting the total
wait time. The due date is conﬁrmed based on
qANN_com(total) is the estimation of the total wait in the
system under the trained BPN model. qANN_sep(PSP) and
qANN_sep(S) are the wait time estimations in PSP and the
Our research included three types of DDA methodology
with nine rules in our simulation model. Table 2 shows a
The required parameter values for each rule were predetermined. The regression and ANN models were built
A simulation experiment was performed to compare
the DAA rules used in this study. The performance
measures used for the comparison were tardiness, lateness, earliness and the correlation between the predicted
ﬂow time and actual ﬂow time. Tardiness is the absolute
diﬀerence between the actual completion date and the
promised due date for orders. This method was used as
the primary performance measure. A smaller tardiness
implies a better due-date prediction capability. Tardiness
is always equal to the sum of the lateness and earliness.
The formulas used for the performance index are as
½max ð0; di  fi Þ þ max ð0; fi  di Þ =n
di: is the internally set due date for order i
The conﬁguration of the wafer fab considered in this
study is a wafer fabrication factory in Taiwan. The fab
consists of 53 workstations and 301 machines. Product
type, processing time and other information related the
The order releasing mechanism releases new lots into
the fab at a constant rate, e.g. 16 lots/day (i.e. UNIF).
Under the order release mechanism, the fab utilization is
nearly 90%. Before a lot is released, the lot orders are kept
in the pre-shop pool. First-In-First-Out (FIFO) is adopted as the dispatching rule at each work centre. UNIF and
FIFO are in widespread use in practice. Only one in every
10 outputs from the virtual fab was randomly selected to
be included in the sample of 600 jobs for measuring the
DDA rule performance. The simulation was designed for
a simulation time period of 24 hours a day and the data
was collected after 150 warm days. A due date is quoted
immediately when the order is accepted. All of the information used in these DDA rules is collected at that time.
The performance of the nine DDA rules is shown in Table 3 and Fig. 3. The ANN-based DDA rules are shown
to be superior to the regression-based and conventional
rules. The ANN_com and ANN_sep tardiness rate is
lower than the other methods. The diﬀerence is greater
than 2 days. In the regression-based rules, SFM_com and
SFM_sep are superior to KFM_sep and KFM_com. That
is, more information used will improve the prediction
performance. The conventional rules, including TWK,
JIQ, and JIBQ, are inferior to the others. Owing to the
complexity of wafer fabrication, the conventional DDA
rules, including single information, are inadequate. The
ANN-based rules are better than others in lateness and
earliness. SFM_sep and SFM_com are better than the
conventional rules. The tardiness variance is signiﬁcant in
the DDA rules. In the ANN-based rule the maximum
tardiness is more than 17 days. The regression-based and
conventional rule had more than 18 days tardiness. It is
very signiﬁcant that the DDA rule, using simple methodology, is not sensitive to the due date. Due-date quoting
based on these rules will not have the capability to reﬂect
the reality in the fab. ANN-based rules have a smaller
The correlation coeﬃcients between real ﬂow time and predict ﬂow time of lots
Table 4 Duncan’s multiple range test for the DDA rulesa
The number is DDA rule: 1. SFM_com, 2. SFM_sep, 3. ANN_com,
4. ANN_sep, 5. KFM_com, 6. KFM_sep, 7. TWK, 8. JIQ, 9. JIBQ
tardiness value and variance. The ANN-based rule duedate prediction capability is better than others.
The on-time delivery percentage is another important
performance index. On-time delivery is deﬁned as the
order’s tardiness is smaller than 1 day. That is, the
forecasted due date is not larger or smaller than one day
of the actual ﬂow time. ANN-based DDA rules have
39% on-time delivery. More than 80% of the orders can
be delivered before the predicted due date. The percentage of on time delivery is not derived from a greater
buﬀer on the due-date prediction. The due-date prediction accuracy using ANN-based rules is better than that
using regression-based and conventional rules.
Table 4 shows the Duncan’s multiple test result at
a=0.05. The ANN-based rules are superior to the other
In this research regression-based and ANN-based DDA
rules were developed and tested in a virtual fab. The
conventional DDA rules, TWK, JIQ, and JIBQ, were
used as the benchmark in the simulation model. The
simulation result and statistics showed that the ANNbased DDA rules produce a better due-date prediction.
The ANN-based DDA rule tardiness is smaller than that
from the other rules. Their sensitivity and variance are
also better than the others. If the wafer fab information
is not very diﬃcult to obtain, the ANN-based DDA rule
can perform due-date prediction. The regression-based
and conventional rules, SFM_sep and JIQ are better
than the other rules. SFM_sep, like the ANN-based rule,
is based on lots of information about the wafer fab. If
the cost of obtaining this information is too expensive,
KFM-com, KFM-sep, and JIQ are suitable for due-date
There are some other topics that can be discussed in
the future, including the integration of the due-date
assignment rule and shop ﬂoor control strategies, such
as order review/releasing and dispatching. Because the
interaction among the shop ﬂoor control strategies is
signiﬁcant, the eﬀect of order review/release and dispatching on due-date prediction cannot be ignored.
Due-date prediction based on capability planning in
place of a prediction model can be developed.
Acknowledgement This research acknowledges the subvention
from National Science Council (NSC) project: NSC 91-2213-E009-113
1. Chung SH, Yang MH, Cheng CM (1997) The design of due
date assignment model and the determination of ﬂow time
control parameters for the wafer fabrication factories. IEEE
Transaction on Component, Packaging, and Manufacturing
2. Smith ML, Seidman A (1993) Due date selection procedure for
job shop simulation. Comput Ind Eng 7:297–320
3. Cheng TCE, Gupta MC (1989) Survey of scheduling research
involving due date determination decisions. Eur J Oper Res
4. Eilon S, Chowdhury IG (1976) Due-date in job shop scheduling. Int J Prod Res 14:223–138
5. Vig MM, Dooley KJ (1991) Dynamic rules for due-date
6. Weeks JK (1979) A simulation study of predictable due-dates.
7. Kaplan AC, Urnal AT (1993) A probabilistic cost-based due
date assignment model for job shops. Int J Prod Res 31:2817–
8. Enns ST (1993) Job shop ﬂow time prediction and tardiness
control using queue analysis. Int J Prod Res 31:2045–2057
9. Smith CH, Minor ED, Wen HJ (1995) Regression-based due
date assignment rules for improved assembly shop performance. Int J Prod Res 33:2375–2385
10. Philipoom PR, Rees LR, Wiegmann L (1994) Using artiﬁcial
neural networks to determine internally-set due-date assignments for shop scheduling. Decis Sci 25:825–847
11. Fausett L (1994) Fundamentals of neural networks. PrenticeHall, New York
12. Udo GJ (1992) Neural networks applications in manufacturing
13. Ragatz GL, Mabert VA (1984) A simulation analysis of due
date assignment rules. J Oper Manage 5:27–39
14. Huang CL, Huang YH, Chang TY, Chang SH, Chung CH,
Huang DT, Li RK (1999) The construction of production
performance prediction system for semiconductor manufacturing with artiﬁcial neural networks. Int J Prod Res 37:1387–
15. Chang FCR (1994) A study of factors aﬀecting due-date predictability in a simulation dynamic job shops. J Manuf Syst
16. Shyur HJ, Luxhoj JT, Williams TP (1996) Using neural networks to predict component inspection requirements for aging
17. Rumelhart DE, Mcclelland JL (1989) Parallel distributed processing: explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1.
