A Journal Devoted to the Problems of Capital Investment
ISSN: 0013-791X (Print) 1547-2701 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utee20
Flow time and product cost estimation by using an
artificial neural network (ANN): A case study for
To cite this article: Aslan Deniz Karaoglan & Omur Karademir (2017) Flow time and product cost
estimation by using an artificial neural network (ANN): A case study for transformer orders, The
Engineering Economist, 62:3, 272-292, DOI: 10.1080/0013791X.2016.1185808
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0013791X.2016.1185808
Accepted author version posted online: 05
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=utee20
Download by: [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck]
http://dx.doi.org/./X..
Flow time and product cost estimation by using an artificial
neural network (ANN): A case study for transformer orders
Aslan Deniz Karaoglana and Omur Karademirb
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Department of Industrial Engineering, Balikesir University, Balikesir, Turkey; b Organized Industrial Zone, BEST
In electromechanical industrial corporations, determining the production cost of the orders according to the technical specifications
demanded by the customer has great importance in giving an accurate
price offer. Labor cost is one of the important and most variable cost
components that must be estimated in order to give an accurate price
offer. In this study, a feed-forward back-propagation artificial neural network (FF-BPN) is used to predict the flow times of power transformer
orders of a transformer producer according to the technical specifications given by the customer. The results of this study show that the prediction capability of an artificial neural network is very good for this type
of problem and results in better cost estimation than current company
practice. A case study is carried out for a manufacturer of electrical transformers in Turkey.
The electromechanical industrial sector is a labor-intensive and competitive sector that has
high asset turnover and a low profit margin. Therefore, it is essential to calculate the cost of the
received orders with a low variance in order to give realistic price offers and compete in this
industry. The main factors of a product cost are the labor, material, and overhead costs. The
material cost can be predicted with a low variance because the material costs of the received
orders are estimated from the bill of materials. The overhead cost can be added to the unit
production costs by taking previous experiences into consideration. The labor cost is another
important cost component that has almost 20% share in the overall cost.
Calculation of the material cost of a transformer is a routine purchasing activity. The difference between prescribed and actual material costs in this case study is ±1%, which is acceptable because of the high precision level. However, this is not the case for the labor cost. The real
labor cost can only be calculated after production, although the price offer must be prepared
before production. In the electromechanical industrial sector, most of the sales are obtained
by tender offers. All qualified companies can participate in the tender offers, and the best price
offers determine which company gets the contract. If the price offer of a particular company is
Balikesir University, Engineering Faculty, Department of Industrial Engineering, , Cagis Campus, Balikesir, Turkey.
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in the article can be found online at http://www.tandfonline.com/utee.
©  Institute of Industrial & Systems Engineers
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
below the accrued cost, the company loses money, whereas there is a possible risk of not winning the order if the offer is too high. Thus, accurate prediction of the labor cost in preparing
the tender offer before production is of great importance.
In the company that is selected for this study, a labor–intensive project-type production
system is used to produce transformers. With the exception of a few similar transformers
produced frequently, there are unlimited types of different transformer orders received from
customers. If an order for a transformer that is not produced previously is received by the
company, the way to calculate the labor time is to review the flow times of previously produced transformers from the database and try to estimate the possible flow time and labor
cost inferentially for the current order. In other words, there is no computational practice in
the company to calculate the processing times and flow times accurately. This causes problems
in giving accurate price offers to the customers.
The prior studies in the literature on this subject can be classified into three groups. The
first is analytical methods that used objective functions and constraints to find the optimum
solution for production flow time, the main determinant of labor cost. These methods produce good results and can mostly find the optimum solution for small-sized problems under
some assumptions such as the processing times are known before the production. However,
when the dynamic job shop conditions are considered, these assumptions make accurate flow
time prediction impossible. For large-sized problems, using heuristics is a good alternative
to obtain nearly optimum results. However, making assumptions about processing times is
still required and this causes unrealistic solutions for real industrial systems under dynamic
production conditions. The second group is simulation and regression-based methods. These
methods are used effectively for large-sized problems by employing calculated probability distributions or previous data. Artificial intelligence is the third group. These methods also give
acceptable results for real industrial systems under dynamic job shop conditions. Our study
focuses on the area of artificial intelligence methods.
There are several relevant prior studies in the literature that used artificial intelligence techniques to estimate flowtime. Arizono et al. (1992) studied the prediction and minimization
of the total actual flow time by using a Gaussian machine model. They used job sequences,
processing times, setup time, and starting times as input to predict the actual flow time. Vig
and Dooley (1993) used mixed flow time estimation, and Lee and Kim (1993), Hill and Remus
(1994), and Statake et al. (1994) worked on scheduling with artificial neural network (ANN)
by using general job and shop characteristics (such as average number of parallel resources,
average number of processing steps per job, and the number of operations required by jobs).
Udo (1994) used proportional workload function, cumulative distribution function, the total
work content (TWK), and constant allowance methods for the same purpose. Enns (1995)
used a dynamic forecasting model to estimate the due date by using forecasting errors and the
confidence interval of the delivery performance level. Smith et al. (1995) predicted the due
date and flow time with the aid of dispatching rules by using general job characteristics (number of jobs, number of operations, processing times, and so forth) and shop floor information. Sabuncuoglu and Gurgun (1996) combined algorithmic and ANN (Hopfield network)
approaches and used jobs, job sequences, and machines as input in a single machine job shop.
Mean tardiness and minimum cycle time were the performance measures used. W. Chen and
Muraki (1997) developed a network by using back-propagation neural networks (BPNs) to
predict the completion time and job schedule. In addition, this network was able to update the
status of the job shop on-line. In the following years, regression analysis, fractional factorial
design, full factorial design, and response surface methodology (RSM) were used in different studies for the same purpose (Harris 1997; Ivanescu et al. 2002; Raaymakers et al. 2001;
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Veral 2001; Veral and Mohan 1999). In these studies, the average number of identical
resources, average number of processing steps, average overlap, standard deviation of the processing times, workload balance, processing times, workstation utilization, dispatching rules,
shop configurations, job characteristics, transporter speed, buffer capacity, shop load, and
routing configurations are used as factors (input variables) for due date or flow time estimation. Raaymakers et al. (2001) focused on the combined characteristics of a group of jobs and,
in their following work, Raaymaker and Weijters (2003) compared the performance of their
previous results with new results that were obtained by ANN. The authors used regression
models and ANN to predict makespan. Lengyel et al. (2003) used TWK, constant allowance,
and feasibility function (FF) for due date prediction. Hsu and Sha (2004) used ANN to forecast the due date under different shop floor control strategies. They used dispatching rules,
TWK, and just in queue. Sha et al. (2007) used regression analysis and analytical methods
together for due date estimation. Li et al. (2007) combined the BPN model and genetic algorithms (GAs) for completion time prediction. Genetic algorithms were adopted in the BPN
to determine the BPN’s parameters and to improve the accuracy of estimated time of completion. Alenezi et al. (2008) developed a support vector regression model for real-time flow
time prediction in multiresource, multiproduct systems. Patil (2008) developed an enhanced
ANN-based due date quotation model using machine learning, evolutionary, and metaheuristics learning concepts. Patil used a genetic algorithm to determine the topology of the artificial
neural network. Patil used job shop characteristics such as number of operations, sum of processing times, and number of jobs waiting in the queue as factors to estimate the due date. Zhu
et al. (2008) trained neural networks by using Petri net simulation for different manufacturing
resources and product types to predict the due date. Baykasoglu et al. (2008) used adaptive
response rate exponential smoothing, last data point, dynamic total work content method,
dynamic processing plus waiting, and analysis of variance for due date and flow time estimation. In their study, number of machines at each work station, route for each job, processing
times for each route, and transportation times are used as factors. Alpay and Yüzügullu (2009)
used full factorial design, simulation, and some other analytical methods for the same purpose and they used processing times, number of operations, number of jobs in queues, and
mean flow time of latest three jobs as factors. Asadzadeh et al. (2011) presented a flexible
algorithm based on ANN, fuzzy regression, and conventional regression for forecasting lead
time. T. Chen and Wang (2013) estimated the job cycle time by using principle component
analysis, fuzzy logic, and BPN. Kumru and Kumru (2014) used ANN to forecast operation
times in metal industry. Table 1 summarizes the literature review for the prior studies that
These prior studies generally focused on the characteristics related to the job or job shop
such as processing times, cycle times, variances, number of workstations, workload, number of jobs in the queues, and other factors to predict the flow time. However, these studies are presented under the assumption that the processing times and/or their probability
distributions are either known or can be calculated from prior data. The literature review
given in Table 1 indicates that there is no prior study that uses product specifications or
order specifications demanded by the customer to predict the processing times and flow time
instead of using general job and shop characteristics. In other words, the processing times and
flow times have not been predicted by using the properties of the product and the customer
This is the motivation for the present study. In this study, in order to give an accurate
price offer to the customer for products that were not manufactured previously, the flow times
were estimated to calculate the labor cost before production based on technical specifications
Table . Summary of literature review for artiﬁcial intelligence.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
(power, voltage, and so forth) demanded by the customer (not the general job and shop characteristics such as number of jobs waiting in the queue, number of workstations, and so forth).
Our aim is to provide a more accurate bid price than is currently achieved by the company.
The production system of the selected transformer producer is described in the following section. The ANNs are described next. In addition, the performance comparison for the ANN
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Figure . Summarized production ﬂow chart for oil-type transformer.
and the factorial design is given in the same section. Results and discussions are given in the
next section. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in the last section.
Production system of this case study company
A transformer is an electrical device that is used to convert one alternating current voltage
level to another through electromagnetic induction. By using this device, electric power can
be transmitted to consumers that are far away from its source. Transformers are the devices
that can distribute the voltage and current of electric power according to need (Harlow 2012).
This study was carried out in a company that produces oil-type and dry-type cast resin
transformers in Turkey. In the company, the manufacturing line is designed for a laborintensive project-type production that is composed of sequential processes. A summarized
production flowchart for the oil type transformer is given in Figure 1. Figure 2 is a photo of a
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
The production operations of the company consist of four main steps. They are (1) magnetic core production, (2) winding production, (3) active part assembly, and (4) final assembly. Magnetic core production, winding production, and mechanical production processes
are done in parallel and all start at the same time when the job order is placed into production. Then the magnetic core and windings are assembled. This assembled product is called
the “active part” of the transformer; that is, the part that converts one alternating current
voltage level to another through electromagnetic induction. While these operations continue,
mechanical parts (vessel, shutter, and other components) are produced by the mechanical
production process. The active part is then set into a vessel. By this operation the critical processes are completed. Following this operation, assembly of the shutter is performed and then
the oil filling and assembly of other required parts are completed.
In magnetic core production, the company utilizes cold-rolled grain-oriented silicon steel,
which has high conductivity and low power losses. Core material is sliced and cut into dimensions that are planned as per the needs of the specifications prepared by the engineering
department. All of the lamination sheets, which are sometimes of a length up to 4 to 4.5 m,
are stacked manually. The winding operation is performed with a closed pressurized building
technology. The windings are built on computer numerical control (CNC)-controlled horizontal and vertical machines. Depending on the power rating, voltage levels, and the customer specification, several different winding techniques are applied. Active part assembly is
another critical operation where the semifinished products of magnetic core production and
the winding operations are assembled. During the manufacturing process, insulation paper on
copper conductors, insulation material between windings, and insulation parts in supporting
structures are exposed to humidity. This moisture impacts the forces that the active part can
withstand. In this regard, drying of the complete active part is a requirement in transformer
production. Therefore, all active parts are dried in ovens. The period of drying is based on the
voltage levels and insulation quantities. Following the drying process, the active part is prepared for a pressing operation in order to increase short circuit withstanding capability of the
transformer. This operation, which is a critical factor for a high-quality product, enables the
producer to increase stability of the windings and the active part. The active part is inspected
once more in order to ensure the quality. Following this inspection, the active part is inserted
into the vessel and fixed. Subsequently, the cover is closed, the tank is taken into a vacuuming
operation, and the tank is filled with oil. Following oil filling, the transformer is left to rest
before factory tests and the period of rest depends on the capacity of the transformer. After
completing the test procedures, production of the transformer is complete.
Although the production process seems unique for transformer production, the processing times of each operation and the flow times of each order vary according to the technical
specifications that are demanded by the customer. In this study, the flow time of the oil type
transformers for each order is predicted by using ANNs with the consideration of the technical data instead of using general job and shop characteristics. The following section gives a
brief description of the materials and methods used in this study.
Flow time estimation of transformers by the aid of ANN
The company exports its products to 75 countries and has a wide range of products including
rectifiers, current rectifiers, wind turbine transformers, and medium power transformers that
change levels under load. These products have a variety of standards that vary according to
Table . List of factors that have an eﬀect on processing times and their levels.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Weight of core (amount of cold-rolled grain-oriented silicon steel)
customer and local specifications. The same transformer designs with equal power and voltage
output may be completely different because of customer technical specification variations.
Because of these design differences, both material content and labor time are far from being
standardized. To perform accurate prediction of flow times (mostly depending on processing
times) and labor costs of orders, a feed-forward back-propagation artificial neural network
(FF BPN) was employed by using a Matlab (Natick, MA: MathWorks) program. The factors
that have effect on the processing times and their levels are given in Table 2.
The historical processing times for each order that varies according to the customer’s contract requirements or local specifications are obtained from Oracle ERP database of the company. For this purpose, a data set that is composed of 200 different specifications was selected.
These samples are selected randomly. However, to obtain better generalization capability from
the ANN, we try to take into account the samples that have high representation capability.
Because of confidentiality, the original data are not given in this article. Instead, coded values
of specifications and the processing times are used for training the network and performing
prediction. The input matrix for the training data set is coded by dividing each column by
its maximum value, and in this way all of the results became smaller than one and normalized. The NLTC (no-load tap changer) and OLTC (on-load tap changer) terms are qualitative
variables whose values are expressed verbally. Therefore, these values are numbered 1 and 2,
respectively, and divided by 10 for the normalization because 1 is a bias value. Coded values
for the sample data set are listed in Table 3.
The parameters of the ANN are usually set up by several techniques like trial and error,
genetic algorithm, simulated annealing algorithm, design of experiment techniques (RSM,
factorial design, Taguchi), and so forth to minimize the mean square error (MSE) of the predicted results of ANN. In this study, the network topology is determined by using trial-anderror methods. Preliminary investigations are conducted to choose a suitable network topology and training algorithm for the network. The design parameter for hidden layers is fixed
to two hidden layers after numerous preliminary trials. The ANN topology used in this study
is presented in Figure 3 (Ham and Kostanic 2001; Karaoglan 2011).
According to our experiments performed to investigate the appropriate topology of the
network, the following factors were used: number of neurons at each layer (from 4 to 16),
type of activation function (purelin, tansig, logsig), learning rates (lr; 0.01 to 0.40 with different combinations for each experimental trial), and momentum constants (mc; from 0.3
to 0.9 with different combinations for each experimental trial) are used. The performance
measurement of the study is the MSE and 0.001 is the target MSE value. MSE results of
each parameter combination are recorded in a matrix that is defined in Matlab. Experimental
runs are carried out to determine the MSE for each combination of parameters. The parameter combination that gives the minimum MSE is selected from the records as the optimum
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Table . Coded values for sample data set selected from  units.
Deﬁnitions for the factors: power: power of the transformer; voltage: voltage of the transformer; NLTC/OLTC: having load top
charger in the design or not; cold-rolled grain-oriented silicon steel: amount of core material that is composed of cold-rolled
grain-oriented silicon steel; copper: amount of copper that is used in windings; ST -steel: amount of ST -steel that is used
in vessel production; oil: amount of oil that is used to ﬁll the transformer for insulation and cooling the transformer; ﬂow
Figure . ANN topology for the given problem.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
training parameters. A total of 19 different topologies are constructed with various network
parameter combinations of mc and lr (a total of 463 combinations) and are summarized in
In Table 4, for line 1, the number of neurons in each hidden layer is determined as 4 for
both layers. The activation functions for all layers are determined as logsig and in this way the
topology is fixed. Then different combinations of momentum coefficient (mc: 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8;
four different values) and learning rate (lr: 0.1, 0.7, 0.1, 0.15; four different values) are examined (for this single topology given in line 1, 16 different trial combinations are examined).
The MSE values are recorded and the training parameters with minimum MSE values are
selected as the optimum parameter values for the given topology. This is repeated for all 19
different topologies given in Table 4. In Table 4, I, H1, H2, and O represent the input, hidden,
and output layers, respectively; “Min MSE” is the calculated MSE value for the optimum lr
and mc combination, “Expected Value” is the observed flow time, and the “Predicted Value”
column is the predicted flow time by the selected optimum ANN for the related row. Finally,
“PE” represents the prediction error between the expected and the predicted value of flow
time by ANN. The summarized ANN training result are given in Table 4.
In this study, according to the data given in Table 4, minimum MSE (0.000055) is reached
with the network topology given in the ninth row. In this topology, 13 neurons are used for
each hidden layer. The logsig activation function is used for the neurons of the input and
output layers, and the tansig activation function is used for the neurons of hidden layers. The
optimum training parameters of this network are 0.35 for lr and 0.9 for mc. The total mean
prediction error that is calculated from observed and predicted values for the determined
optimum network topology (ninth topology in Table 4) is 0.2336% for the training set (which
is composed of 200 observations). It is clearly observed from Table 4 that the memorization
capability of the net is good enough for the training data set. The optimum network topology
The trained network model was then tested by using six different experimental data points
(check data) that were not used in the training process. Results of the ANN predictions with
the test data set are presented in Table 6 and Figure 4.
It is seen from Table 6 and Figure 4 that the ANN prediction is in good agreement with
the experimental results. This outcome shows that the selected ANN model can be used
effectively for flow time prediction in transformer production or similar production systems. The performance comparison for the proposed ANN topology is given in the following
The performance of the proposed ANN is compared with the results of a factorial design,
which is one of the widely used design of experiments techniques. Factorial designs have been
employed previously in the literature for predicting flow time. Their main advantage is easy
implementation and effective computation. The regression model of factorial design for the
given problem is given in Equation (1) (Castillo 2007; Giesbrecht and Gumpertz 2004; Mason
y = β0 + β1 x1 + β2 x2 + · · · + β7 x7 + β8 x1 x2 + · · · + β28 x6 x7 + β29 x1 x2 x3 + · · ·
+ β63 x5 x6 x7 + β64 x1 x2 x3 x4 + · · · + β99 x4 x5 x6 x7 + β100 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 + · · ·
+ β120 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 + β121 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 + · · · + β127 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7
Values in bold: Selected network topology and its optimum training parameters.
Table . Summarized training results of trials for  diﬀerent network topologies.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Table . Optimum network topology and its parameters.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Number of neurons at each hidden layer respectively
Transfer functions of hidden layers, respectively
Transfer functions of input layer and output layer
Figure . Performance of the ANN topology that is selected as the optimum one.
Regression coefficients for the factorial design model can be calculated by using
where Y is the output matrix and X is the input matrix, and ε is the residuals (random error
term). The least square estimator of the β matrix that is composed of coefficients of the regression equation is calculated by the given formula in Equation (3):
The X matrix is composed of the observed values given in Table 3 and the mathematical equation given in Equation (4) is calculated by using Equations (1)–(3). For this purpose, the Minitab (State College, PA: Minitab, Inc.) statistical analysis program is used. In the
case in which the interactions are considered in the mathematical model, the performance of
Table . List of ANN predictions with check data set.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Table . Performance of factorial design for the factor levels given in Table .
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
the model decreases dramatically for the confirmation tests so that only the linear terms are
selected. The R2 (coefficient of determination) value for the model given in Equation (4) is
calculated as 0.995 by using the factor values given in Table 3.
Flow Time = −0.0201215 − 0.371798 (Power) + 0.0984925 Voltage + 0.125379 (NLTC/OLTC)
−0.366960 Weight of Core + 0.480010 Weight of windings
+0.829958 Weight of tank + 0.223555 Weight of oil .
Performance tests are performed by using the data given in Table 3 and Table 7. In addition,
the results of the performance comparison for the check data are given in Table 8 for the ANN
and the regression equation of factorial design.
However, the mean accuracy (calculated by using check data set) for the regression model
given in Equation (4) is calculated as 89.4% and the accuracy is calculated as 97.31% for the
ANN predictions. Therefore, the generalization capability of the ANN is impressive for this
type of problem where the technical specifications demanded by the customer are directly
used as factors instead of using the job or shop characteristics (which is the common practice
in the literature) to predict the flow time. The results for cost estimation obtained by this study
Table . Performance comparison of ANN and factorial design with check data set.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
The problem encountered while giving a price offer for a product that will be produced for the
first time is to determine the quote as accurately as possible with a low deviation. Because the
actual costs arise after the completion of production while the offering price to the customers
happens at the bidding stage, offering a high price risks losing a bid. On the other hand, giving
a low price offer may cause a loss or a low profit margin. Therefore, it is essential to calculate
the total cost in order to determine the price offer accurately.
There are three main cost items that are taken into account when preparing the price offer.
The first one is raw materials (stainless steel, oil, copper, etc.) and equipment components
(bushing, tap changer, electric panel, etc.) costs. These comprise the total material cost. These
cost items can be estimated correctly with a deviation of ±1–2% according to the material
list, which is obtained from preliminary product design during the order. The same applies
in overhead cost, which is another important cost item. In the case study company, the actual
overhead cost is computed by considering the expenses such as electricity, heating, administrative, marketing and selling, distribution, etc. (except the expenses related to flow time of
each order, labor cost, and material cost). Then it is allocated to the orders by considering
the share of each order’s cost in the total variable cost that is calculated in a particular time
period. This allocation key is used to balance the distributed overhead cost to the orders by
discussing their prices. This is the allocation of actual overhead cost.
However, at the time of tender offer the proportion of total variable cost of a particular
order during the period of production is not known by the company. For a particular tender
offer, overhead cost is predicted by considering the overhead cost already incurred for the
same period of the previous year. This previously observed overhead cost is multiplied by the
annual inflation rate and then allocated to each order at tender offer on the basis of a multiplier
coefficient that is calculated by dividing the material cost of each order at tender offer to the
total material cost incurred for the same period of the previous year.
As for the calculation of labor costs, it is necessary to determine the flow time based on
the technical specifications of the received orders in a most accurate way. This study focuses
on flow time estimation with a minimum deviation. This section examines how the improved
flow time estimation yields better bid price estimates for the company. For this purpose, the
data used in Tables 9–12 and the results of the calculations are reviewed.
In Table 9, the estimated and the actual costs are given for 20 samples listed in Table 3
using current company flow time estimation methods. Due to commercial confidentiality, the
numbers are scaled by multiplying a coefficient with the actual costs and keeping the ratios
constant between them. The first column of Table 9 denotes the sample number that connects
Table 3 and Table 9. The second column of Table 9 (column A) indicates the coded flow time
values that are given in Table 3. In column B flow time values that are estimated before production are also coded due to commercial confidentiality. Columns C and D state “labor costs
that occur after the production takes place” and “labor costs estimation based on the technical specifications of the received orders before the production takes place,” respectively. These
costs are obtained by multiplying the flow time values by the hourly labor costs.
Multiplying the coded flow time values with actual hourly labor costs will result in the
calculation of coded costs instead of accrued costs. This will make it difficult for the reader
to follow the article. Therefore, in order to obtain the closest cost values, coded flow time
values are multiplied by a specially coded hourly labor cost (650,000 euro/h); ultimately this
calculation provides realistic actual cost values. Labor costs calculated in this way are given in
columns C and D, respectively. These two columns show that the difference between expected
Table . Expected and actual cost values of the sample in Table .
production (euro) cost (euro) production (euro) cost (euro) production (euro)
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Table . Estimated bid price by company methods, actual bid price, and the estimated bid price by ANN for the sample data in Table .
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Table . Expected and actual cost of check data given in Table .
production (euro) cost (euro) production (euro)
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Flow time estimation Labor cost estimation with
Table . Estimated, actual, and estimated price oﬀer with ANN and results.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
and actual labor costs for 20 samples that are given in the table varies around an average of
The estimated and actual costs of raw materials and equipment, which are other important
cost items, are shown in columns E and F, respectively. Columns G and H show the estimated
and actual overhead costs. Columns I and J are the actual total cost and the estimated total
Table 10 compares the errors between actual cost and estimated cost by comparing current company costing methods with costing using ANN. As mentioned previously, the cost
values are multiplied by a certain coefficient due to commercial confidentiality, but the relationship between them reflects actual relationships. Column M shows the difference between
the estimated labor cost and the actual labor cost using current company methods. Similarly,
column N shows the estimation error between the actual labor cost and estimated labor cost
when the flow time value was predicted by the ANN. When the estimation errors are examined in columns M and N, it shows that labor cost estimation is closer to the actual costs if
the flow time estimation is done by ANN. Column O is found by summing up the labor cost
estimation by ANN with raw material costs (Column F) and overhead (Column H), which are
shown in Table 9. Overheads, raw material, and equipment costs are not predicted by ANN,
so the company’s predicted values are used for these values.
For better performance comparison between company methods and ANN, MSE is used.
MSE can be calculated by the formula given in Equation (5):
where ŷi is the estimated total cost (by company methods or ANN), yi is the observed total
cost, and n is the sample size. In Table 10, the error in total cost estimates (euro) by company
methods and ANN can be seen in columns P and R, respectively. This result indicates that the
ANN method is better for total cost estimate.
Calculations and analyses for the values given in Table 6 are presented in Tables 11 and
12. The results are important to demonstrate the performance of the ANN because the ANN
is faced with these samples for the first time since they were not utilized during the ANN
Upon analyzing the results in Table 12, the error in total cost estimates by the ANN is lower
than the company methods. The MSE is calculated by using columns P and R, respectively.
These results show that the proposed ANN approach can be used by the sales department as
Calculating the production times and labor costs accurately is important in cost estimation.
For the company in this case study, except for a few similar transformers produced frequently,
there are numerous types of different transformer orders received from customers. This causes
difficulty in giving accurate price offers to customers because of unknown processing times
and flow times of orders to be produced for the first time. According to the literature review, it
is observed that the existing studies try to estimate flow times using the characteristics related
to the job or shop (such as processing times, number of resources, and so forth). In this case
study, the input variables are the technical specifications demanded by the customer. Using
technical specifications directly to estimate the flow time of an order before production was
not applied previously for this type of problem. In this study, an artificial neural network that
uses technical specifications demanded by the customer is designed to predict the flow time
(and in this way predicts the labor cost). Using technical specifications directly to estimate the
flow time is a novel approach. The results show that the accurate prediction capability of the
ANN improves the cost estimate for this type of problem. As future research, support vector
machine, GA, linear vector quantization neural networks, and RSM will be investigated to
solve this flow time and cost estimation problem and their performances will be compared.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
The authors thank the Best Transformers Company for its support and Melike Sultan Karasu Asnaz and
Dr. Akin Atas, whose support was invaluable in completion of this article. Finally, the authors thank the
editor, area editor, and anonymous referees, whose valuable suggestions led to improved organization
Aslan Deniz Karaoglan received a diploma degree in industrial engineering from Gazi University
(Turkey) and Ph.D. in industrial engineering from Dokuz Eylul University (Turkey). His research interests are statistical process control, design of experiments, neural networks, scheduling, and Petri nets.
Omur Karademir received an M.Sc. degree in industrial engineering from Balikesir University
(Turkey) and works for a transformer producer.
Alenezi, A., Moses, S.A. and Trafalis, T.B. (2008) Real-time prediction of order flow times using support
vector regression. Computers & Operations Research, 35(11), 3489–3503.
Alpay, S. and Yüzügullu, N. (2009) Dynamic job shop scheduling for missed due date Performance.
International Journal of Production Research, 47(15), 4047–4062.
Arizono, I., Yamamoto, A. and Ohta, H. (1992) Scheduling for minimizing total actual flow time by
neural networks. International Journal of Production Research, 30, 503–511.
Asadzadeh, S.M., Azadeh, A. and Ziaeifar, A.A. (2011) Neuro-fuzzy-regression algorithm for improved
prediction of manufacturing lead time with machine breakdowns. Concurrent Engineering-Research
Baykasoglu, A., Gocken, M. and Unutmaz, Z.D. (2008) New approaches to due date assignment in job
shops. European Journal of Operational Research, 187(1), 31–45.
Castillo, E.D. (2007) Process optimization—a statistical approach. Springer: New York, NY.
Chen, T. and Wang, Y.C. (2013) An iterative procedure for optimizing the performance of the fuzzyneural job cycle time estimation approach in a wafer fabrication factory. Mathematical Problems in
Engineering Article, 2013: 740478. doi:10.1155/2013/740478
Chen, W. and Muraki, M. (1997) An action strategy generation framework for on-line scheduling
and control system in batch processing with neural networks. International Journal of Production
Enns, S.T. (1995) A dynamic forecasting model for job shop flowtime prediction and tardiness control.
International Journal of Production Research, 33(5), 1295–1312.
Giesbrecht, F.G. and Gumpertz, M.L. (2004) Planning, construction, and statistical analysis of comparative experiments. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ.
Ham, F.M. and Kostanic, I. (2001) Principles of neurocomputing for science and engineering, 1st ed.
Harlow, J.H. (2012) Electric power transformer engineering, 3rd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Harris, C.R. (1997) Modelling the impact of design, tactical, and operational factors on manufacturing
system performance. International Journal of Production Research, 35(2), 479–499.
Downloaded by [Universitaetsbibliothek Innsbruck] at 08:16 15 November 2017
Hill, T. and Remus, W. (1994) Neural network models for intelligent support of managerial decision
making. Decision Support Systems, 11(5), 449–459.
Hsu, S.Y. and Sha, D.Y. (2004) Due date assignment using artificial neural networks under different shop
floor control strategies. International Journal of Production Research, 42(9), 1727–1745.
Ivanescu, C.V., Fransoo, J.C. and Bertrand, J.W.M. (2002) Makespan estimation and order acceptance
in batch process industries when processing times are uncertain. OR Spectrum, 24(4), 467–495.
Karaoglan, A.D. (2011) An integrated neural network structure for recognizing autocorrelated and
trending processes. Mathematical & Computational Applications, 16(2), 514–523.
Kumru, M. and Kumru, P.Y. (2014) Using artificial neural networks to forecast operation times in metal
industry. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 27(1) 48–59.
Lee, Y.H. and Kim, S. (1993) Neural network applications for scheduling jobs on parallel machines.
Computer and Industrial Engineering, 25, 227–230.
Lengyel, A., Hatono, I. and Ueda, K. (2003) Scheduling for on-time completion in job shops using
feasibility function. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 45, 215–229.
Li, S., Li, Y., Liu, Y., and Xu, Y. (2007) A GA-based NN approach for makespan estimation. Applied
Mathematics and Computation, 185(2), 1003–1014.
Mason, R.L., Gunst, R.F. and Hess, J.L. (2003) Statistical design and analysis of experiments, 2nd ed. John
Montgomery, D.C. (2001) Design and analysis of experiments, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New
Patil, R.J. (2008) Using ensemble and metaheuristics learning principles with artificial neural networks
to improve due date prediction performance. International Journal of Production Research, 46(21),
Raaymakers, W.H.M., Bertrand, J.W.M. and Fransoo, J.C. (2001) Makespan estimation in batch process
industries using aggregate resource and job set characteristics. International Journal of Production
Raaymakers, W.H.M. and Weijters, A.J.M.M. (2003) Makespan estimation in batch process industries:
a comparison between regression analysis and neural networks. European Journal of Operational
Sabuncuoglu, I. and Gurgun, B. (1996) A neural network model for scheduling problems. European
Journal of Operational Research, 93, 288–299.
Sha, D.Y., Strorch, R.L. and Liu, C.H. (2007) Development of a regression-based method with casebased tuning to solve the due date assignment problem. International Journal of Production Research,
Smith, C.H., Minor, E.D. and Wen, H.J. (1995) Regression-based due date assignment rules for
improved assembly shop performance. International Journal of Production Research, 33, 2375–2385.
Statake, T., Katsumi, M. and Nakamura, N. (1994) Neural network approach for minimizing the
makespan of the general job-shop. International Journal of Production Economics, 33, 67–74.
Udo, G.J. (1994) A simulation study of due date assignment rules in a dynamic job shop. Journal of the
Operations Research Society, 45(12), 1425–1435.
Veral, E.A. (2001) Computer simulation of due-date setting in multi-machine job shops. Computers &
Veral, E.A. and Mohan, R.P. (1999) A two-phased approach to setting due-dates in single machine job
shops. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 36(1), 201–218.
Vig, M.M. and Dooley, K.J. (1993) Mixing static and dynamic flowtime estimates for due-date assignment. Journal of Operations Management, 11, 67–79.
Zhu, H.P., Zhan, H.H., Liu, F.M., and Liang, Y.M. (2008) Combination of high-level Petri net simulation
and neural network ensemble and its application in the prediction of order due date. Proceedings of
Information Technology and Environmental System Sciences, 4, 413–417.
