International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 2014
Vol. 27, No. 1, 48–59, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2013.800231
Using artiﬁcial neural networks to forecast operation times in metal industry
Department of Industrial Engineering, Dogus University, Istanbul, Turkey; bDepartment of Industrial Engineering, Kocaeli University,
(Received 18 April 2012; ﬁnal version received 23 April 2013)
This study was conducted in an auto spare parts production plant where the biggest bottleneck in managing the enterprise is
the lack of fulﬁlling the requisitions of the customers on time. The main reason for the delay is the absence of operation
time data valid for the required parts ordered with different speciﬁcations. For preparing effective schedules and for
eliminating the bottleneck, the factory needs to use reliable operation time data for each part produced. An artiﬁcial neural
network (ANN) approach was used for this purpose, and its forecasting performance was compared with that of multiple
linear and nonlinear regression models. Based on the statistical analyses, the ANN approach outperformed the regression
models and is found to be more reliable in forecasting the operation times.
Keywords: forecasting; forecasting methods; artiﬁcial neural networks; multiple regression
Increasing competition is forcing business enterprises to
pay more attention to customer satisfaction. High quality,
low cost and on-time delivered products and services are
deemed necessary to compete in today’s global economy.
How efﬁcient you produce your product or service affects
the cost and quality of what you produce. It is crucial for
enterprises to deliver products with desired features punctually. Products not delivered on time have a demoting
Integrating key applications into business operations is
essential to attain customer satisfaction. That is why contemporary managers are trying to utilise various kinds of
technology and decision-making tools in their establishments. These techniques/tools are made operative in both
areas of business and manufacturing. For manufacturing
companies, planning and control plays an important role,
which entails the acquisition and allocation of limited
resources to production activities so as to satisfy customer
demand over a speciﬁed time horizon. Organising and
operating a demand-driven manufacturing model requires
the capability to capture and manage massive amounts of
real-time information, which needs to be quickly elaborated to provide the right transparency to production and
materials ﬂow within the plant. Sometimes predicted
information becomes necessary for these models, where
using the past the future is predicted by identifying trends,
patterns and business drives within the data.
Companies striving for operational excellence and a
competitive advantage realise the impact forecasting has
upon the ability of a company to satisfy its customers
and to simultaneously manage its resources. Forecasting
*Corresponding author. Email: mkumru@dogus.edu.tr
provides the input for planning production: process
design, capacity planning, aggregate planning, scheduling
and inventory management. Forecasting in a factory plays
the hardest role of knowing what to produce now to
supply the demand in the future and containing the
resources available on hand to do this. The challenge is
not only to come up with the future demand and the
efﬁcient manufacturing design, but also to beat the lead
times in between the chains in the systems. Therefore,
forecasting has been used considerably in manufacturing
and technology along with other areas of management.
Various forecasting methods/techniques have been
employed in this area for different purposes. A comparison of these methods is given below, and the artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANNs) deserve a special part therein.
The aim of this study was to use ANN approach in
forecasting the operation times of manufacturing parts and
to test its performance against those of regression models.
In this respect, the article describes a signiﬁcant advancement in the particular ﬁeld of applied research. It presents
ﬁrst in the proceeding sections an ANN application to
forecast operation times of a lathe machine for speciﬁc
orders of products in a manufacturing plant. Further, the
forecasting performance of the proposed model is checked
against that of multiple linear and nonlinear regression
2. Forecasting methods in manufacturing and
Several forecasting methods have been used in manufacturing and technology from simplest to the complicated
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
ones. Nine forecasting methods were described and discussed in three groups by Meade (2000). The ﬁrst three
methods assume a minimal time series structure (long-run
average (an average of previous observations is used as a
forecast), no change (the last known observation is used as
a forecast) and deterministic trend (an average of previous
differences is used to estimate a global linear trend)). The
second group of methods (single exponential smoothing
(stochastic level, no trend), Holt’s linear trend (stochastic
level, stochastic linear trend) and Holt’s damped trend
(trend tamped by a geometric factor)) use exponential
smoothing. Robust trend method (non-parametric version
of Holt’s linear trend method – median-based estimate of
trend) is also included in this group. The author declares
that exponential smoothing methods are sensitive to the
estimation procedure and to the values used to initialise
the procedure. The third group comprises the autoregressive moving average (ARMA)-based methods (ARMA,
ARARMA): These are the sophisticated methods and
describe stationary time series. One major difference
between the two methods is the means by which the series
Alfares and Nazeeruddin (2002) arranged in roughly
chronological order and discussed the nine categories of
forecasting techniques, which are multiple regression,
exponential smoothing, iterative reweighted least squares,
adaptive forecasting, stochastic time series, ARMAX
model (ARMA with exogenous inputs) based on genetic
algorithms, fuzzy logic, neural networks and knowledgebased expert systems. The authors also added the
expanded forms of these models into their study. They
asserted that the time series approach is still widely used,
but because of their limited success, a number of old
approaches seem to be out of favour, and there is considerably less emphasis on methods such as iterative reweighted
least-squares and adaptive forecasting. After surveying all
these approaches, they observed a clear trend towards new,
stochastic and dynamic forecasting techniques (fuzzy
logic, expert systems and particularly neural networks).
There is also a clear move towards hybrid methods,
which combine two or more of the forecasting techniques.
Rapach and Strauss (2008) examined different approaches
(individual and combining/hybrid) to forecasting and
found that combining methods based on principal components exhibit the best overall performance, while methods
based on simple averaging, clusters and discount mean
squared forecast error also perform well. They also warn
that some combining methods, such as those based on
ordinary least squares, often perform quite poorly.
A few other comparative studies in forecasting methods are introduced shortly below. Paliwal and Kumar
(2009) found that though multiple regression, discriminant
analysis and logistic regression are some of the commonly
used traditional statistical techniques applied for prediction and classiﬁcation and are being widely used in
various applications because of their established methodology, ANNs are being used as an alternative to these
traditional techniques and gaining popularity in recent
years. Finnie, Wittig, and Desharnais (1997) compared
three estimation techniques (regression analysis, ANNs
and case-based reasoning) and stated that regression models performed poorly on the data, but both ANNs and
case-based reasoning appeared to have value for estimation models. Similarly, Kim, An, and Kang (2004) applied
the same techniques namely multiple regression analysis,
ANNs and case-based reasoning and concluded that
although the best ANN model performed better than the
other models for accuracy of estimation, the procedure to
train the best ANN model was slow because of the trial
and error process. Setyawati, Sahirman, and Creese (2002)
concluded that ANNs outperformed linear regression
models, given the same training data and the same variables. However, according to Feng and Wang (2002),
there are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between
the performances of the two methods (nonlinear regression
analysis and computational ANNs). Yesilnacar and Topal
(2005) found that the ANNs method predicts better than
the logistic regression method. Dvir et al. (2006) showed
that ANNs have signiﬁcantly better explanatory and prediction power, and it enables the exploration of relationships among the data that are difﬁcult to arrive at by
traditional statistical methods. Pendharkar (2006) conﬁrmed the superior performance of ANN over the linear
In forecasting problems, in general, the most widely
used technique has been the regression model. Through
the use of linear regression techniques, Rossetti and Clark
(2003) developed a methodology for using bar code scanner timing information from an automated shop ﬂoor data
collection system to estimate mean operation times for
multiple product types within a ﬂexible manufacturing
system environment. Vainio et al. (2010) achieved good
results with multivariate linear regression model in estimating the printed circuit board assembly times and proposed to consider the nonlinearity case for better results.
However, they also suggested by comparison that the
nonlinear ANN has the potential to improve the estimation
The above review clearly points out the potential of
ANNs being used as a tool for classiﬁcation and prediction problems. ANNs have outperformed in most of the
cases or at least performed as well as other methods.
Validity of assumptions for statistical techniques is critical
to the performance and brings limitation to use these
techniques optimally. It has also been suggested in many
studies to combine the features of both techniques to
enhance the overall prediction or classiﬁcation performance. In this regard, these two techniques become complementary methods for model building rather than
competing methods (Paliwal and Kumar 2009).
Based on the foregoing discussions, it may be said that
in most of the manufacturing and technology problems
with a nonlinear relation and complexity among the variables, ANNs perform better than the other forecasting
methods. Because of its inherent ability to capture nonlinearity and the complexity of the changeable environment of each project, ANNs model may improve the
estimation of any kind in technical ﬁelds. Forecasting the
operation times in manufacturing is also a typical problem
to which the ANNs approach can be performed effectively. This featured approach is to be explained brieﬂy
An ANN is a mathematical or computational model based
on biological neural networks. It consists of an interconnected group of artiﬁcial neurons and processes information using a connectionist approach to computation. In
most cases, an ANN is an adaptive system that changes
its structure based on external or internal information that
ﬂows through the network during the learning phase. In
more practical terms, ANNs are nonlinear statistical data
modelling tools. They can be used to model complex
relationships between inputs and outputs or to ﬁnd
patterns in data (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artiﬁcial_
ANNs are highly interconnected simple processing
units designed in a way to model how the human brain
performs a particular task (Catalao et al. 2007). Each of
those units, also called neurons, forms a weighted sum of
its inputs to which a constant term called bias is added.
This sum is then passed through a transfer function: linear,
sigmoid or hyperbolic tangent. The units are organised in
a way that deﬁnes the network architecture. Networks with
interconnections that do not form any loops are called feed
forward. Recurrent or non-feed forward networks in which
An example of a simple feed forward network.
there are one or more loops of interconnections are used
for some kinds of applications (Almeida 1997). In feed
forward networks, units are often arranged in layers: an
input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer
(Figure 1). The units in each layer may share the same
inputs, but are not connected to each other. Typically, the
units in the input layer serve only for transferring the input
pattern to rest of the network, without any processing.
ANN models can be used to infer a function from
observations. This is particularly useful in applications
where the complexity of the data or task makes the design
of such a function by hand impractical. The tasks to which
ANNs are applied tend to fall within the broad categories
of functional approximation, classiﬁcation and data processing. Imitating the functioning of human brain, ANN is
a tool of great importance in forecasting as well. Most
widely used ANN type forecasting is multi-layer perception (MLP). In an MLP designed forecasting, determining
the variables, such as number of inputs, hidden and output
neurons, is highly important (Hamzaçebi 2007).
Forecasting with ANNs involves two steps: training
and learning. Training of feed forward networks is normally performed in a supervised manner. One assumes
that a training set is available, given by the historical
data, containing both inputs and the corresponding desired
outputs, which is presented to the network. The adequate
selection of inputs for neural network training is highly
inﬂuential to the success of training. In the learning process, a neural network constructs an input–output mapping, adjusting the weights and biases at each iteration
based on the minimisation of some error measure between
the output produced and the desired output. Thus, learning
entails an optimisation process. The error minimisation
process is repeated until an acceptable criterion for convergence is reached.
ANNs are being widely used in many ﬁelds of study
including the areas of prediction and classiﬁcation, the
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
areas where statistical methods have traditionally been
used. This could be attributed to the fact that these networks are attempts to model the capabilities of human
brains. Since the last decade, ANNs are being used as a
theoretically sound alternative to traditional statistical
models. Both the traditional statistical methods and
ANNs are looked upon as competing model-building techniques in literature. A number of researchers have illustrated the connection of ANNs to traditional statistical
methods (Paliwal and Kumar 2009). Smith and Mason
(1997) showed in their study that ANNs have advantages
when dealing with data that does not adhere to the generally chosen low order polynomial forms or data for
which there is little a priori knowledge of the appropriate
regression model to be selected. The ANN produces
improved performance over conventional regression analysis in terms of mean absolute percentage error. Error rate
predicted by the ANN is smaller than that predicted by the
regression analysis (Lee and Um 2000; Heiat 2002).
The advantages that ANNs offer are numerous and
achievable only by developing an ANN model of high
performance. Unfortunately, determining suitable training and architectural parameters of an ANN still remains
a difﬁcult task. Finding out the optimal number of hidden layers and hidden neurons is usually cumbersome, as
no general methodology is available for their ascertainment. These parameters are typically determined in
trial and error procedure, where a large number of
ANN models are developed and compared to one
another. This process is repeated until the error rate is
minimised or reaches to an acceptable level or until a
speciﬁed number of iterations have been accomplished.
However, analyses and experiments have shown that the
optimal ANN training and architectural parameters can
also be determined in a systematic way to avoid the
lengthy trial and error procedures. Several methods
have been used for this purpose, such as design of
experiment (Laosiritaworn and Chotchaithanakorn
2009), genetic algorithm (Leung et al. 2003; Ahmed
et al. 2009), evolutionary algorithm (Davoian, Reichel,
and Lippe 2006; Au, Choi, and Yu 2008), optimality
factor (Khela and Sandhu 2011), pattern search algorithm (Ihme, Marsden, and Pitsch 2008), Taguchi
One of the important advantages of ANNs cited in the
literature is its ability to approximate automatically any
nonlinear mathematical function. This aspect is particularly useful when the relationship between the variables is
not known or is complex, and hence it is difﬁcult to
handle statistically. ANNs has also been criticised in
most of the articles because of its lack of interpretability
of the weights obtained during the model building process
and time consuming course of action to ﬁnd the optimal
ANNs have proven to be effective mapping tools for a
wide variety of problems, and consequently they have
been used extensively by practitioners in almost every
application domain ranging from agriculture to zoology.
Since ANNs are best at identifying patterns or trends in
data, they are well suited for prediction or forecasting
applications (Jha 2007). Along with numerous forecasting
applications in other than manufacturing areas (Kalogirou
2001; Kermanshahi and Iwamiya 2002; Doganis et al.
2006; Pendharkar 2006; Pao 2006; Pao 2007; Cadenasa
and Rivera 2007; Jha 2007; Wang 2007; Pino et al. 2008),
there is, however, a considerable number and variety of
these works in manufacturing ﬁeld. A small sample of
manufacturing focused ANN applications are indicated
Most of the ANN applications have been made in
production scheduling. A comprehensive overview on
ANN approaches for solution of production scheduling
problems was given in the paper of Akyol and Bayhan
(2007), where they discussed both theoretical developments and practical experiences and identiﬁed research
trends. Within this scope, it is worth to mention the study
of Feng et al. (2003), who applied the ANNs (multilayered perceptron networks) to the problem of job
shop scheduling under a deterministic time-varying
demand pattern over a ﬁxed planning horizon. Doganis,
Aggelogiannaki, and Sarimveis (2008) proposed a complete management framework for production-inventory
systems based on model predictive control and on a
neural network time series forecasting model and showed
that the proposed scheme can improve signiﬁcantly the
performance of the production-inventory system because
of more accurate predictions. Johnston, Maguire, and
McGinnity (2009) dealt with manufacturing performance
improvement and used by this purpose the ANNs to
identify downstream performance in manufacturing
environment and highlighted how the six-sigma approach
is employed to guide the deployment of the intelligent
systems approaches to obtain improved performance in
these environments. Al-Ahmari (2008) used ANNs for
turning operations to develop empirical models for tool
life, surface roughness and cutting force to attain minimum production cost. There is a couple of recent
researches that use ANN focused on predicting the physical shapes and quality of manufacturing products, such
as predicting the work piece geometry (Martin, Dantan,
and D’Acunto 2011), predicting the build-up edge formation in machining (Fang, Srinivasa Pai, and Edwards
2010), predicting the weld-quality (Pal, Pal, and
Samantaray 2010), predicting the surface roughness
(Quintana, Bustillo, and Ciurana 2012) and predicting
the surface roughness and vibration (Asiltürk et al.
In estimating the process parameters, the following
studies are worth to mention. Yarlagadda and Khong
(2001) worked on an ANN system to predict injection
moulding process parameters such as injection time and
injection pressure. By integrating the different aspects of
metal injection moulding process, Yarlagadda (2002)
further studied neural network system for the same purpose. Chang, Wang, and Ting (2008) discussed a neuralfuzzy model for the ﬂow time estimation using simulated
data generated from a foundry service company. Their
neural-fuzzy model applied inﬂuential factors identiﬁed
from the shop ﬂoor, that is order processing time, total
work-in-process and total jobs in system and utilisation of
bottleneck machines, to estimate the ﬂow time of a new
order. Identifying the process parameters (cutting speed,
feed rate, depth of cut and tool nose radius) as inputs,
Vainio et al. (2010) trained multilayer ANNs to approximate the assembly times of two different types of assembly machines based on several parameter combinations
(component types, component shapes, component dimensions, etc.) in electronic assembly industry and used
Bayesian regularisation to achieve efﬁcient learning and
good accuracy. In their study, Shafaei, Rabiee, and
Mirzaeyan (2011) applied an adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system using six heuristic scheduling algorithms to
estimate the makespan in multiprocessor no-wait twostage ﬂexible ﬂow shop.
As a result, ANNs have been applied successfully in
many manufacturing and engineering areas, but to our
knowledge no study has been encountered in the literature
on the estimation of operation times in metal industry by
ANN method as was given in this work. This inference
conﬁrms the originality of this article. The research is
presented as a new contribution to existing knowledge in
The implementation was conducted in an auto spare
parts manufacturing plant. The biggest bottleneck in
managing the enterprise was the inability to fulﬁl the
requisitions of the customers on time. The delay in
delivery time was up to 47 days for the enterprise (company records). The main reason for the delay was the
lack of information regarding the operation times of
lathing (surface ﬁnishing by turning operation) for the
required parts with different speciﬁcations. For those
types of products, it was difﬁcult to estimate the operation times intuitively. Since ANN is an appropriate tool
in prediction of nonlinear and complex systems, it was
investigated in this study whether the ANN is a convenient modelling approach for estimating the operation
The application part of the study was composed of four
stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the factors and their levels affecting the duration of lathing operations of specially required
parts were determined. The necessary data were searched
from historical production records and exemplary ﬁgures
were derived. In case of any lack of appropriate data, time
study measurements were carried out. Even so, limited
amount of data could be gathered because of production
constraints. The data on hand were classiﬁed as of training
and prediction data. Correlation analyses were investigated to understand the level of relationship between the
In the second stage, after determining its conﬁguration,
ANN was applied to the training data by using NeuroXL
Predictor software. Consistency between the actual and the
ANN predicted data were evaluated by hypothesis testing.
Several error measures were derived to make comparisons.
In the third stage, alternative forecasting methods,
namely multi-variable linear and nonlinear regression,
were applied to the same set of data. Consistencies
between the actual and the regression predicted data
were evaluated again by hypothesis testing. Several error
measures were also derived to make comparisons.
In the ﬁnal stage of application, the prediction performances of ANN and regression methods were compared.
The ﬂowchart of the methodology is given in Figure 2.
5.3. Factors affecting the operation time
For the inputs of the ANN, the factors affecting the duration of surface ﬁnishing operation were decided by
domain experts. Three levels were determined for each
type of input. It was assumed that the operation parameters of cutting speed and feed value are adjusted to
the most appropriate values according to cutting tool and
Hardness or softness of material is to affect the operation
times. Brass, iron and steel are three different groups of
materials used in the factory. They have different impacts
on the amounts of operation times. Since brass is the
softest and steel is the hardest one among these material
groups, operation times are to increase for the same process from brass to steel. Thus, the level of operation times
for brass, iron and steel were grouped respectively as 0.30,
0.40 and 1.0 minute for a standard operation.
The total surface area to be ﬁnished affects the length of
operation time. Three levels of total surface area to be
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
ﬁnished were derived from statistical data ,which are
area 1 (≤9 cm²), area 2 (≥10 cm² and ≤19 cm²) and
Amount of chips to be removed is also another factor that
affects the length of operation time. As a resultant of
number of surfaces multiplied by the depth of lathing
operations, load of ﬁnishing was grouped into three levels,
such as low volume (1), average volume (2) and high
Number of operations is also effective on the length of
operation times. As number of operations increase, the
operation times increase as well. At most, three different
operations have been performed on the products. So, the
levels were determined as single operation, double operation and triple operation.
There are various types of lathing operations that differ
from each other in complexity. The complexity of the
shapes being machined on the lathe is related to intricacies
of work piece cross-sections along the axis of revolution.
As the level of complexity increases, it gets difﬁcult and
time consuming to perform the job. Therefore, the level of
complexity of the jobs was categorised into three groups:
simple (1), common (2) and complicated (3).
The input factors and their levels are summarised in
This factor is affected by dimensional quality to some
extent as an outcome. Small tolerances also need longer
operation times. Because, for high precision operations,
cutting (turning velocities) are to be lowered. For smoothness, low (1), average (2) and high (3) levels were deﬁned.
With respect to the above factors and their levels, historical production records were searched and exemplary ﬁgures were derived. In case of any lack of appropriate data,
time study measurements were carried out. These ﬁgures
constituted the ANN input values. Thirty-nine sets of data
were selected for training the ANN. The inputs are shown
Before going further, correlation analyses were conducted
on the training data by using DataFit software to understand the level of relationship between the factors and the
operation times. The results are given in Table 3. Here, Xs
represent the input factors, while Y represents the operation
time. X1 corresponds to the factor ‘Type of Material’, X2
corresponds to the factor ‘Surface Area Finished’, and so
on. The table values show that the amount of X–Y correlation changes is between 0.4711 (X6–Y) and 0.7016 (X3–Y),
which imply quite strong positive linear relationship
between the independent and the dependent variables.
When the correlation ﬁgures among independent variables
are concerned, however, it is seen that the correlation
changes in between 0.0958 (X2–X3) and 0.5154 (X1–X4),
which imply a varying amount of positive relationship.
These results ensure the validity of the selected variables.
When the ANN conﬁguration for the problem is considered, it is speciﬁed that in this network, the information
moves in only one direction, forward, from the input
nodes, through the hidden nodes, and to the output
nodes. There are no cycles or loops in the network. It
needs a single-layer organisation, in which all units are
connected to one another, constitute the most general case.
Training and architectural parameters in the study were
determined by trial and error procedure. Various ANN
conﬁgurations with different transfer functions and varying number of hidden neurons (from 0 to 6) were tested by
use of the training data to ﬁnd the most suitable conﬁguration. The standard error of prediction ﬁgures derived
It is seen from the table that the ANN conﬁguration
using the log-sigmoid transfer function with three hidden
neurons gives the minimum standard error of prediction
(0.153404). In this conﬁguration, which is the most suitable one, the units are of log-sigmoid character where the
output varies continuously but not linearly as the input
changes. Therefore, NeuroXL Predictor software with
conﬁguration of feed-forward network, six inputs, one
hidden layer with three neurons, one output and nonlinear
log-sigmoid transfer function was used in solving the
problem. The ANN parameter values were set to 0.3 for
initial weights and learning rate and 0.6 for momentum.
Training was completed with 167 epochs and 0.001
The ANN model was also run on 10 sets of data determined for predictions. The model outputs are given together
with the actual data for comparison purpose in Table 5.
To evaluate the consistency between the actual and the
ANN predicted data, a hypothesis testing was applied to
test the equality of population means of these two data
sets. T-test was used with the assumption of unknown and
unequal population variances. The test parameters are
given below. Subscript 1 refers to actual data, while subscript 2 refers to prediction data.
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
Table 4. Standard error of prediction ﬁgures for different transfer functions.
Notes: *Hyperbolic tangent function is not applicable. It gives repeated and meaningless results. **Threshold function with 0 neuron gives negative
H0: μ1 ¼ μ2 ; H1: μ1 Þμ2 ; X1 : 2:3050; X2 : 2:4172;
s21 : 0:3269; s22 : 0:5304, t-value: –0.3832, degrees of freedom: 18, p-value: 0.7061, sig. level: 0.2939. This result
indicates that there is not a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the two sets of prediction data. Therefore,
Regarding the standard error measures (accuracy measures), the values are as follows: mean forecast error
(MFE): –0.1122, mean absolute deviation (MAD):
0.1763 and mean absolute percent error (MAPE):
0.0961. This means that the prediction model has considerable over-forecast (0.1122) with an average absolute
error of 0.1763 units. This corresponds to a 9.61%
amount of mean absolute error (90.39% forecasting
However, to better understand the conformity level of the
present model in predicting the operation times, a commonly used alternative forecasting method was also
applied for the problem. A multi-variable regression analysis was conducted on the same set of training data. A
linear model with coefﬁcients of –1.4524, 0.2929, 0.3773,
0.4752, 0.2617, 0.2383 and 0.1846 was built up. The
regression model was tested on the same prediction data.
H0: μ1 ¼ μ2 ; H1: μ1 Þμ2 ; X1 : 2:3050; X2 : 2:3145;
s21 : 0:3269; s22 : 0:4882: t-value: –0.0333, degrees of freedom: 18, p-value: 0.9738, sig. level: 0.0262. H0 is
Regarding the standard error measures, the values are
such that MFE: –0.0095, MAD: 0.2453 and MAPE:
0.1078. This implies that the prediction model tends to
have ignorable over-forecast (0.0095) with an average
absolute error of 0.2453 units, which corresponds to a
10.78% amount of mean absolute error (89.22% forecasting accuracy).
Table 6. Prediction data (linear regression).
Since ANNs are nonlinear statistical data modelling tools,
a multi-variable nonlinear regression analysis was also
conducted on the same set of training data for benchmarking purpose. A six-parameter nonlinear polynomial model
with coefﬁcients of 0.1759, 0.2668, 0.3607, 0.1861,
0.0890 and 0.0020 was built up. The regression model
was tested on the same prediction data. The output is
H0 : μ1 ¼ μ2 ; H1 : μ1 Þμ2 ; X1 : 2:3050; X2 : 2:2252;
s21 : 0:3269; s22 : 0:2542, t-value: 0.3310, degrees of
freedom: 18, p-value: 0.7445, sig. level: 0.2555. H0 is
Regarding the standard error measures, the values are
such that MFE: 0.0798, MAD: 0.2229 and MAPE:
0.1081. This implies that the prediction model has considerable under-forecast (0.0798) with an average absolute
error of 0.2229 units, which corresponds to a 10.81%
amount of mean absolute error (89.19% forecasting
When the statistical values of the ANN and the regression
methods were compared, it is seen that the ANN model
has performed slightly better than the other two models for
accuracy of estimation. The forecasting accuracy of the
ANN was 90.39%, while the regression models had
almost the same accuracy; it was 89.22% for the linear
regression and 89.19% for the nonlinear regression.
Regarding the mean absolute deviation, the ANN model
still owned the minimum ﬁgure (0.1763) among the models. The linear regression model had the maximum ﬁgure
(0.2453) and the nonlinear model took place in between
(0.2229). Mean forecast error ﬁgures, however, point out
the superiority of the linear regression method over the
other two. The linear regression had negligible over-forecast value (0.0095), while the nonlinear model had considerable under-forecast value (0.0798) and the ANN had
quite considerable over-forecast value (0.1122). The pvalues conﬁrm the interpretation similar with that of the
mean forecast errors. Here again, the linear regression
model showed much better performance (0.9738) than
the other two models (nonlinear regression: 0.7445,
ANN: 0.7061). Although the p-value and the MFE statistics brought results in favour of the linear regression
model, the other two statistics (MAD, MAPE) come
forth as more reliable instruments in comparing the methods. Since the MFE statistic measures the tendency of a
forecasting model to consistently over-forecast or underforecast, where positive and negative errors tend to cancel,
the MAD statistic, however, removes this drawback and
does not let positive and negative errors do cancel each
other out. Consequently, the test and comparison results
indicate relatively the higher performance of ANN over
the linear and nonlinear multiple regression models given
the same training data and the same variables. It is conﬁrmed that the ANN method predicts better than the
regression methods in forecasting operation times in manufacturing. Its prediction is quite good with ignorable
amount of standard error. This level of prediction performance strengthens our conviction in favour of the ANN
method, so that it is more accurate and sound to be used in
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
forecasting operation times in manufacturing. Though statistical values were in favour of the ANN, when comparing the results, the cost of using ANN should be taken into
consideration as well. A tradeoff should be determined
between better forecast accuracy with application limitations of ANN and lower forecast accuracy with ease of use
of regression methods. For the case studied, forecast accuracy was important and that is why, in spite of its disadvantage of higher cost, the ANN was preferred against
regression methods. The comparative test results are given
The prediction data of the methods are graphically
displayed together with the observed data in Figure 3.
ANNs are being used increasingly in business applications
and in certain ﬁelds, such as ﬁnance management, production, operations and business forecasting. This study is a
unique one about to use ANN for manufacturing needs.
The model was tailored to estimate the operation times for
speciﬁc jobs for a bottleneck machine in an auto spare
parts manufacturing plant. The accuracy of results was
checked against the test data. As was given in the article,
even with limited data used for training, it was found that
the ANN predictions were quite good. It was also concluded that the ANN produces improved performance
over conventional regression analysis in terms of mean
absolute percentage error. Error rate predicted by the ANN
is smaller than that predicted by the regression analysis.
Since ANNs can automatically approximate any nonlinear mathematical function, this aspect of neural networks
is particularly useful when the relationship between the
variables is not known or is complex, and hence it is
difﬁcult to handle statistically. However, using it is not so
straightforward and a relatively good understanding of the
underlying theory is essential. A neural network-based
modelling approach requires setting up several user-deﬁned
parameters like learning rate, momentum, optimal number
of nodes in the hidden layer and the number of hidden
layers. The determination of these parameters is important,
and ﬁnding the optimal conﬁguration of neural networks is
a very time consuming process. The other feature of neural
networks is the lack of interpretability of the weights
obtained during the model building process, whereas the
statistical model clearly stands out as it allows interpretation
of coefﬁcients of the individual variables.
It is clear that a neural network depends more on
training data and the learning algorithm, while regression
requires an explicit function to be deﬁned before the least
squares parameter estimates. Increasing the number of
training examples is likely to improve the performance
of neural networks. However, overtraining arises as a
problem when too many training examples are provided,
and the system becomes incapable of useful generalisation. This can also occur when too many neurons exist in
the network and the capacity for computation exceeds the
dimensionality of the input space. To avoid overtraining
problem, various methods (early stopping, weight decay,
Bayesian regularisation, noise injection, test data, etc.)
have been developed to determine when to stop training.
That is why, during training, care must be taken not to
provide too many input examples, and it should be
remembered that different numbers of training examples
could produce very different results in the quality and
robustness of the network. Creating a well-founded set
of observations has to be done with care. In our case, we
did not encounter such a problem because the number of
training examples was limited, the number of epochs and
the weight delta were quite low and the prediction accuracy was very high in the test set. With the correct implementation, ANNs can be used naturally in online learning
The outcome of this study encourages the application
of ANN for operation time estimation, but the results
obtained are parameter speciﬁc and data sensitive. Using
additional layers of hidden neurons enables greater processing power and system ﬂexibility at the cost of additional complexity in the training algorithm. Having too
many hidden neurons makes the system over speciﬁed and
incapable of generalisation. Having too few hidden neurons, conversely, can prevent the system from properly
ﬁtting the input data and reduces the robustness of the
system Since the quality of ANN models depends on a
proper setting of ANN architecture and ANN meta-
parameters, the main issue for practitioners trying to apply
ANN regression is how to set these parameter values to
ensure good generalisation performance for a given data
set. This is a technical problem in nature and takes several
Using the network in an application is fast as the
application of the ready network can be written as a
function. Without compromising its accuracy, robustness
and implementation feasibility, it is possible to adapt the
network in an easy manner to new observations for different kinds of applications. As forecasting provides the
input for production planning – process design, capacity
planning, aggregate planning, scheduling and inventory
management – the potential users of ANN systems are
the departments (production management, engineering,
scheduling, etc.) responsible for those operations.
A quick glance of the tables given in previous sections
would reveal that neural networks outperform or at least
performs as well as regression methods. It might be useful
to combine the features of both the techniques to enhance
the overall prediction performance. In this regard, these two
groups of techniques become complementary methods for
model building rather than competing methods. Therefore,
a tradeoff should be determined between better forecast
accuracy with application limitations of ANN and lower
forecast accuracy with ease of use of regression methods.
Though ANN is found to be an appropriate and effective method to forecast the operation times in this different
area of application, its performance depends on the type of
problem and the quality of training data. Therefore, the
data collection phase, which is one of the time consuming
events for an enterprise, should be carried out effectively.
With clearly deﬁned problem inputs, sufﬁcient amount of
data and proper conﬁguration of the model, similar results
could be achieved. Further research can be extended on
using ANN predictions for chain of operations with several hidden layers and outputs.
Ahmed, O., M. Nordin, S. Sulaiman, and W. Fatimah. 2009. “Study
of Genetic Algorithm to Fully-Automate the Design and
Training of Artiﬁcial Neural Network.” International Journal
of Computer Science and Network Security 9 (1): 217–226.
Akyol, D. E., and M. Bayhan. 2007. “A Review on Evolution of
Production Scheduling with Neural Networks.” Computers
and Industrial Engineering 53 (1): 95–122.
Al-Ahmari, A. M. A. 2008. “Prediction and Optimization
Models for Turning Operations.” International Journal of
Alfares, H. K., and M. Nazeeruddin. 2002. “Electric Load
Forecasting Literature Survey and Classiﬁcation of Methods.”
International Journal of Systems Science 33 (1): 23–34.
Almeida, L. B. 1997. “Multilayer Perceptrons.” In Handbook of
Neural Computation, edited by E. Fiesler, and R. Beale,
Asiltürk, İ., M. Tinkir, H. El Monuayri, and L. Çelik. 2012. “An
Intelligent System Approach for Surface Roughness and
Au, K. F., T. M. Choi, and Y. Yu. 2008. “Fashion Retail Forecasting
by Evolutionary Neural Networks.” International Journal of
Cadenasa, E., and D. Rivera. 2007. “Wind Speed Forecasting in
the South Coast of Oaxaca, Mexico.” Renewable Energy 32
Catalao, J. P. S., S. J. P. S. Mariano, V. M. F. Mendes, and L. A. F. M.
Ferreira. 2007. “Short – Term Electricity Prices Forecasting in a
Competitive Market: A Neural Network Approach.” Electric
Power Systems Research 77 (10): 1297–1304.
Chang, P.-C., Y.-W. Wang, and C.-J. Ting. 2008. “A Fuzzy
Neural Network for the Flow Time Estimation in a
Semiconductor Manufacturing Factory.” International
Journal of Production Research 46 (4): 1017–1029.
Davoian, K., A. Reichel, and W.-M. Lippe. 2006. “Comparison
and Analysis of Mutation-Based Evolutionary Algorithms
for ANN Parameters Optimization.” In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Data Mining (DMIN'06),
Doganis, P., E. Aggelogiannaki, and H. Sarimveis. 2008. “A
Combined Model Predictive Control and Time Series
Forecasting Framework for Production-Inventory Systems.”
International Journal of Production Research 46 (24):
Doganis, P., A. Alexandridis, P. Patrinos, and H. Sarimveis.
2006. “Time Series Sales Forecasting for Short Shelf- Life
Food Products Based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks and
Evolutionary Computing.” Journal of Food Engineering 75
Dvir, D., A. Ben-Davidb, A. Sadehb, and A. J. Shenhar. 2006.
“Critical Managerial Factors Affecting Defense Projects
Success: A Comparison Between Neural Network and
Regression Analysis.” Engineering Applications of
Fang, N., P. Srinivasa Pai, and N. Edwards. 2010. “Prediction of
Built-up Edge Formation in Machining with Round Edge
and Sharp Tools Using a Neural Network Approach.”
Feng, C.-X., and V. Wang. 2002. “Surface Roughness Predictive
Modelling: Neural Networks Versus Regression.” IIE
Transactions on Design and Manufacturing 40 (3): 683–697.
Feng, S., L. Li, L. Cen, and J. Huang. 2003. “Using MLP
Networks to Design a Production Scheduling System.”
Computers and Operations Research 30 (6): 821–832.
Finnie, G. R., G. E. Wittig, and J-M. Desharnais. 1997. “A
Comparison of Software Effort Estimation Techniques:
Using Function Points with Neural Networks, Case-Based
Reasoning and Regression Models.” Journal of Systems and
Hamzaçebi, C. 2007. “Forecasting of Turkey's Net Electricity
Energy Consumption on Sectoral Bases.” Energy Policy 35
Heiat, A. 2002. “Comparison of Artiﬁcial Neural Network and
Regression Models for Estimating Software Development
Effort.” Information and Software Technology 44 (15):
911–922. Accessed January 15, 2009. http://en.wikipedia.
Ihme, M., A. L. Marsden, and H. Pitsch. 2008. “Generation of
Optimal Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Using a Pattern Search
Algorithm: Application to Approximation of Chemical
Systems.” Neural Computation 20 (2): 573–601.
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
Jha, G. K. 2007. “Artiﬁcial Neural Networks and Its
Applications.” Accessed January 20, 2009. http://www.iasri.
res.in/ebook/EBADAT/5-Modeling%20and%20Forecasting%
20Techniques%20in%20Agriculture/5-ANN_GKJHA_2007.
Johnston, A. B., L. P. Maguire, and T. M. McGinnity. 2009.
“Downstream Performance Prediction for a Manufacturing
System Using Neural Networks and Six- Sigma
Improvement Techniques.” Robotics and ComputerIntegrated Manufacturing 25 (3): 513–521.
Kalogirou, S. A. 2001. “Artiﬁcial Neural Networks In
Renewable Energy Systems Applications: A Review.”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 5 (4): 373–401.
Kermanshahi, B., and H. Iwamiya. 2002. “Up to Year 2020 Load
Forecasting Using Neural Nets.” Electrical Power and
Khela, R. S., and K. S. Sandhu. 2011. “Identiﬁcation of Optimal
ANN Structure for Analysis of Self-Excited Induction
Generator.” International Journal of Electrical and
Kim, G-H., S-H. An, and K-I. Kang. 2004. “Comparison of
Construction Cost Estimating Models Based on Regression
Analysis, Neural Networks, and Case-Based Reasoning.”
Building and Environment 39 (10): 1235–1242.
Laosiritaworn, W., and N. Chotchaithanakorn. (2009). “Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks Parameters Optimization with Design of
Experiments: An Application in Ferromagnetic Materials
Modeling.” Chiang Mai Journal of Science 36 (1): 83–91.
Lee, J., and K. Um. 2000. “A Comparison in a Back-Bead
Prediction of Gas Metal Arc Welding Using Multiple
Regression Analysis and Artiﬁcial Neural Network.” Optics
and Lasers in Engineering 34 (3): 149–158.
Leung, F. H. F., H. K. Lam, S. H. Ling, and P. K. S. Tam. 2003.
“Tuning of the Structure and Parameters of a Neural
Network Using an Improved Genetic Algorithm.” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 14 (1): 79–88.
Madić, M. J., and M. R. Radovanović. 2011. “Optimal Selection of
ANN Training and Architectural Parameters Using Taguchi
Method: A Case Study.” FME Transactions 39 (2): 79–86.
Martin, P., J-Y. Dantan, and A. D’Acunto. 2011. “Virtual
Manufacturing: Prediction of Work Piece Geometric
Quality by Considering Machine and Set-Up Accuracy.”
Meade, N. 2000. “Evidence for the Selection of Forecasting
Methods.” Journal of Forecasting 19 (6): 515–535.
Pal, S., S. K. Pal, and A. K. Samantaray. 2010. “Prediction of the
Quality of Pulsed Metal Inert Gas Welding Using Statistical
Parameters of Arc Signals in Artiﬁcial Neural Network.”
Paliwal, M., and U. A. Kumar. 2009. “Neural Networks and
Statistical Techniques: A Review of Applications.” Expert
Pao, H. T. 2006. “Comparing Linear and Nonlinear Forecasts
for Taiwan's Electricity Consumption.” Energy 31 (12): 2129–2141.
Pao, H. T. 2007. “Forecasting Electricity Market Pricing Using
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks.” Energy Conversion and
Pendharkar, P. C. 2006. “Scale Economies and Production
Function Estimation for Object-Oriented Software
Component.” European Journal of Operational Research
Pino, R., J. Parreno, A. Gomez, and P. Priore. 2008. “Forecasting
Next-Day Price of Electricity in the Spanish Energy Market
Using ANNs.” Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial
Quintana, G., A. Bustillo, and J. Ciurana. 2012. “Prediction,
Monitoring and Control of Surface Roughness in HighTorque Milling Machine Operations.” International Journal
of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 25 (12): 1129–1138.
Rapach, D. E., and J. K. Strauss. 2008. “Forecasting US
Employment Growth Using Forecast Combining Methods.”
Rossetti, M., and G. M. Clark. 2003. “Estimating Operation
Times from Machine Center Arrival and Departure
Events.” Computers and Industrial Engineering 44 (3):
Setyawati, B. R., S. Sahirman, and R. C. Creese. 2002. “Neural
Networks for Cost Estimation.” AACE International
Shafaei, R., M. Rabiee, and M. Mirzaeyan. 2011. “An Adaptive
Neuro Fuzzy Inference System for Makespan Estimation in
Multiprocessor No-Wait Two Stage Flow Shop.”
Smith, A. E., and A. K. Mason. 1997. “Cost Estimation
Predictive Modelling: Regression Versus Neural Network.”
The Engineering Economist 42 (2): 137–161.
Vainio, F., M. Maier, T. Knuutila, E. Alhoniemi, M. Johnsson,
and O. S. Nevalainen. 2010. “Estimating Printed Circuit
Board Assembly Times Using Neural Networks.”
International Journal of Production Research 48 (8):
Wang, Q., 2007. “Artiﬁcial Neural Networks as Cost
Engineering Methods in a Collaborative Manufacturing
Environment.” International Journal of Production
Yarlagadda, P. K. D. V. 2002. “Development of an Integrated
Neural Network System for Prediction of Process Parameters
in Metal Injection Moulding.” Journal of Materials
Yarlagadda, P. K. D. V., and C. A. T. Khong. 2001.
“Development of a Hybrid Neural Network System for
Prediction of Process Parameters in Injection Moulding.”
Journal of Materials Processing Technology 118 (1–3):
Yesilnacar, E., and T. Topal. 2005. “Landslide Susceptibility
Mapping: A Comparison of Logistic Regression and
Neural Networks Methods in a Medium Scale Study,
Hendek region (Turkey).” Engineering Geology 79 (3–4):
Copyright of International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing is the property of
Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted
to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may
print, download, or email articles for individual use.
