systems, job shobs, manufacturing lead times are often long and variable,
and control systems. The first is to treat
planning and control tends to emphasise the development of planning procedures. However, of equal
importance for successful production planning is
the quality of the planning data, such as engineering data (routing sheets and bills of materials),
capacity data (on the workforce and work centres),
and lead time data (suppliers’ lead times and
In intermittent production systems, commonly
known as job-shops, the main problems of concern
with the basic planning data are the uncertainties
and variations in the manufacturing lead times.
These are at the heart of production scheduling.
They have an importance for the production,
marketing and financial functions of the firm.
Procedures like quoting delivery dates (marketing),
capacity planning, order release and machine loading (production) and capital tied-up (finance) are
all based on planning data about manufacturing
lead times in intermittent production systems are often very long. Yet the actual
processing times on all the machines through which
the product has to pass are usually quite small.
The manufacturing lead times are dominated by
the transit times between operations. This is demonstrated by the speed with which urgent orders
can be expedited through the system when required. Stommel [40] showed that about 90% of
the total flow time is due to transit times, of which
85% is due to queuing, 3% to quality control and
2% to transportation. Only 10% is due to actual
processing operations. The problem of determining planning values for manufacturing lead times
is mainly a problem of discovering the underlying
factors that influence these inter-operation transit
times are clearly needed for each individual product for use in the formal planning system. Two
distinct alternative approaches have been taken to
(b) Emphasise the control of the manufacturing
The first option starts from the stance that lead
The best that can be done is to have a formal
planning system that reacts quickly to changes and
then adjusts the planned values used to the actual
lead times as often as is necessary. Lead time
estimation is treated as a forecasting problem. The
emphasis is on accurate forecasting and then developing a planning routine to minimise the im-’
pact of forecast errors. Planning values for transit
times between operations and safety time buffers
are based on historic data and/or on forecasting
the congestion in the shop as a result of the new
master schedule. If the actual lead times increase
then the planning values are automatically increased also.
In the second option, the production system
attempts to manage the average actual lead times
to match pre-determined planning values (norms).
The actual lead times are still calculated. However
this is to determine whether action needs to be
taken to bring them closer to the norms, rather
than to update the planning data. The emphasis is
then placed on determining which levels of planning affect lead times significantly and how they
can be controlled to give average values close to
The objective of the present article is to compare these two different approaches and to review
the main streams of related research. What follows
is not claimed to be an exhaustive account of the
relevant literature, since it must reflect the subjective view the authors take of the problem.
The starting point for both methods is to try to
understand what factors and procedures influence
lead times. Thus the various attempts to analyse and understand lead times are
At the long-term planning level, lead times are
in aggregate determined by factors like the product structure, the production process and the
lay-out of the production facility. At the operational level, the factors that influence inter-operation transit times have been classified by
Heinemeyer [ 181, into short-term, medium-term
and non-quantitative (machine break-downs, missing tools and material, absences). Examples of
short-term influence factors are the batch quantity, processing time, set-up time, priority rule, due
date, etc. The research concluded that none of
these short term factors has a significant influence
In particular the relative importance of the
widely studied priority dispatching rules as in
[ 12,13,29,3,38] is doubtful. Research undertaken
by Berr and Papendieck [9] concluded that as far
only a difference at most of 0.5% between the best
and the worst priority rule. What seems to have a
much more significant impact on manufacturing
costs and lead times, asccording to Bakker [4] and
Kettner [27], is the timing of releasing jobs to the
shop-floor. Research by Pappas [34] came to the
conclusion that no sophisticated priority rule
should be used since the interruption of the ‘natural’ flow of work in the shop adds more problems
The general conclusion is that the medium-term
influence factors are by far the most important.
The role of the backlog of work in the shop as a
major factor influencing lead times is apparent if
the shop is viewed as a complex queuing system.
An early recognition of this role is Little’s result
[31], that the mean number of jobs in the shop,
which is directly related to the mean workload in
the shop, is equal to the product of the mean
number of jobs arriving at the shop per unit time
and the mean job flow-time. Bertrand and Wortmann [lo] showed that the variations in mean
flow-time and in workload induced by variations
in the rate at which orders arrive at the shop are
approximately linearly related to each other.
A remarkable real data simulation system for
analysing manufacturing lead-times and their factors of influence, called DUBAF [27], has been
developed at the University of Hanover, W.
Germany. The system has been used in a series of
research studies [23,46,27] and various projects in
While the relation of the backlog of work and
transit times between operations is easily recognized, the role of capacity planning strategies is
often not clear. Critical accounts of capacity planning strategies are given by Stommel [40], Adam
and Surkis [ 11, while Kochhar [30] describes capacity planning techniques commonly used by standard software
scheduling, infinite capacity loading, load levelling). A fundamental difference exists between operations-oriented and order-oriented strategies. In
the first class of strategies, which dominate the
existing capacity planning modules, the planning
units are the operations. Within the constraints of
earliest and latest release dates, a shop order is
released as soon as capacity is available for the
first operation in the job sequence. In the second
class of strategies, a shop order is not released
unless capacity is available for all its operations.
The order remains close together and shorter transit times between operations are achieved. However, this reduction is at the cost of longer waiting
times in the ‘pool’ of non-released planned orders,
where all orders stay from the time that material
becomes available until they are actually released
to the shop. Since non-released orders have low
value (raw material only), the strategy leads to
lower capital tied-up. On the other hand it allows
less flexibility to the foreman for day-to-day
The choice between the different existing capacity planning strategies has an influence on the time
that a job spends on the shop-floor, which is
makes little difference to the total time that a job
spends in the shop, as this includes the time elapsed
between the arrival of material and the actual
release to the shop-floor. It is this total lead time
which is of interest to the marketing function. An
integrated capacity planning strategy should therefore take into account lead times at all levels, since
it should cover both the marketing and production
3. Lead time management as a forecasting problem
Two different approaches can be distinguished
(a) Use planning values based on historical
(b) Forecast lead-times on the basis of the actual shop load.
The first approach is widely used in industrial
practice. Many companies, especially those operating manual systems, use a simple rule of thumb
with regard to the inter-operation time and usually
allow a number of days or a whole week for the
completion of an operation. Statistical analysis of
past data can help in determining more accurate
mean values for transit times at each work centre.
These mean values are the sum of set-up, processing, queuing and breakdown times of all jobs that
passed through the work centre over a long time
A more sophisticated version of this approach
is the development of a transition matrix (‘fromto’) between all the work centres in the shop. The
manufacturing lead-time is given as the sum of
set-up, processing times and the transit times between the work centres in the job sequence, as
specified by the stored transition matrix.
Another popular method has been to calculate
lead-times on the basis of the job’s processing
time, multiplied by some empirical factor. Jobs are
given flow allowances that are proportional to the
total work required, Griebel [16], Baker and
Bertand [4]. The method relies on an information
base consisting of the parameters describing the
individual job to which a manufacturing lead-time
is being assigned. No shop status information is
included, either in the form of historical data or in
the form of the actual shop workload. Apart from
that, the fact that the processing time is usually a
small part of the total flow time does not justify it
being considered as a major factor of influence
The method used by the majority of standard
software packages for their capacity planning
strategies is the mean planning values for transit
times from one machine group to another (transition matrices). These quite often inaccurate values
result in false reservations of capacity, therefore
false balancing, overloads, increased in-process inventories, increased lead times, missing due dates
and, finally, even greater inacccuracy of planned
transit times. This vicious circle (Kettner and
Jendralski [28], is the main reason for the lack of
satisfaction among the users of capacity planning
A more ambitious approach to the lead-time
estimation problem is to include information about
the actual shop status. For such a purpose, the
shop work load is a natural indicator to use because it is logical that waiting times should reflect
A common method using shop workload information is closely connected with the finite
capacity planning technique [ 11. To find the arrival
time of a job at the next work centre, one has to
add, to the arrival time of the job at the current
work centre, the set-up, processing and transport
times of the operation being performed as well as
the existing load at the work centre. The obvious
disadvantages of this technique arise from its static
view of the shop, since changes of load from the
time of planning until the job actually arrives at
the work centre are not aken into account.
Reiter [37] and Holstein [19] proposed an improved technique which viewed the shop as a
dynamic statistical system, taking into account the
expected congestion that jobs might encounter as
they proceed through the shop. To find the arrival
time of a job at the next work centre, one has to
add, to the arrival time of a job at the current
work centre, the estimated delay or waiting time
resulting from the congestion at the work centre in
that time period as well as the set-up, processing
and transport times for the operation. The significant departure from the previous approach is the
intoduction of the periodic waiting time concept.
The waiting times or delays are calculated for each
work centre for a specific number of future periods. In order to obtain and update these estimated
delays for each work centre at each successive time
period, a forecast of the number of jobs and their
processing times is required. The main drawback
of the approach is that jobs are loaded forward.
The method cannot be applied to the backwards
Eilon and Chowdhury [ 131 investigated leadtime assignment methods based on an estimate of
the future uilisation of capacities in order to assign
optimum due-dates. Their results indicate that the
actual shop workload is an important variable for
due-data assignment. Similar results have been
obtained by Heard [ 171, Weeks [45] and Fryer and
Adam et al. [2], used time-series analysis to
model the delay processes at the queues. The models were used to predict future operation flow-times
from the flow-times realized in past periods. They
indicated that in a shop with high utilisations, the
behaviour of the workload and the flow-times over
time is highly autocorrelated, so that the actual
workload may be a good predictor of the workload
estimation problem is the work of Sainis [39], who
used data from the master schedule to determine
the arrival rate at each work centre in a queuing
model. The lack of analytical results in queuing
of Jackson’s decomposition rule [22], that each work centre can
be viewed as an independent queuing system. This
rule is most appropriate in situations where there
is a random flow of work in the shop, i.e. in pure
job-shops. However, the approach of Sainis remains to be proved in practice.
The recent development of cheap on-line data
retrieval systems [32], suitable and affordable even
for small and medium-sized companies, will allow
for close monitoring of the work-in-process. A
computerized WIP system makes it possible for
the management to determine realistic values of
queue times by observing at frequent intervals, the
queues that build up at a particular work centre.
By drawing a histogram of the frequency at which
a particular queue size occurs at the work centre,
the average queue size can be computed. However,
merely ensuring that the planning data about
manufacturing lead times is always up-to-date is
Most people believe that they need a system
capable of responding more quickly and precisely,
changing planned lead-times to match the actual
lead-times experienced. The vicious circle, reported by Mather and Plossl[33] and Plossl[35] as
the ‘lead time syndrome’ shows that nothing could
be further from the truth. An increased rate of
incoming customer orders inflates lead times.
Planning values for lead times are updated to
reflect the latest situation in the shop. Hence longer
lead times are quoted. Customers react by releasing more orders to cover the requirements during
the increased lead times and lead times are further
inflated. The shop decides to increase its capacity.
Lead times then drop. The customers release fewer
orders. Capacity is decreased and the circle starts
4. Lead time management as a control problem
Lead time in practically any company is a function of the backlog (Plossl and Wight [36]). Based
on this truth, a technique called Input/Output
Control (IOC) st.arted to become popular in the
early seventies, as a consequence of the need to
avoid the disastrous ‘lead time syndrome’. The
idea is, roughly, to keep the amount of workload
at each work centre at a constant level [7,8,35].
Actual average work centre queuing times are the
mean times for all individual orders processed in
one work centre over some period. According to
the IOC technique, actual and planned average
queuing times must be the same. This requires
managing backlogs of work-in-process at each work
centre by controlling the input of new orders
against output of completed work, i.e. against
The main reason behind the build-up of backlogs is the erratic input of work at the work
centres. Backlogs act as buffers for work input
variations just as inventories are buffers against
variations in demand. Thus backlogs can be viewed
as inventories of work. If the work supply to the
work centres is very regular with respect to, time,
the mean job flow-time can be very low. In extreme cases such as conveyer belt production lines,
the mean job waiting-time can be zero, even if
capacity utilization is practically equal to one.
Thus the mean flow-time can be reduced by making the work supply more regular.
The lessons of IOC are fairly simple, but not
always understood in industrial practice:
(a) Input of work must never exceed the output
(b) Input must be regular and smooth over
Based on the ideas of Wight, Belt and Plossl,
Karni [26] developed an extensive systematization
and mathematical formulation of the technique. In
this work Karni tried to provide analytical solutions to the problem of determining optimal work
centre capacities, assuming that the input of new
orders is given. Several dynamic programming and
transportation-type algorithms are presented in [24]
for solving this problem under restrictions of permissible waiting queue sizes and work station
capacities, derived from regular shift, overtime and
two-shift operation. The result is a Capacity Requirement Plan (CRP) with the minimum sum of
A simpler case than planning with variable
capacities, is to be able to plan with constant
capacities for every work centre over the planning
horizon. Karni [25] suggests that for complex cost
functions and permissible underloading of work
centres, complete enumeration of all feasible solutions is the simplest approach.
The assumption of inflexible input of shop
orders, provided by the MRP system, prevents the
planner from carrying out alternative feedback
actions such as altering the master production
schedule, and consequently the input, instead of
changing capacity. Analytical algorithms which are
able to incorporate combined input and output
planning, since they are presumably far more com-
Bertrand and Wortmann [lo] describe an approach which is essentially an IOC technique, but
builds on the basic concepts of general control
theory, which deals with the study of dynamic,
stochastic control problems. However, the available techniques of this theory can rarely be applied
in a straightforward way to the design of production control systems in practice. This is due to the
wide gap existing between the relatively simple
problems subjected to analytic treatment and the
complex nature of actual production control problems (Tocher [43]). Therefore, Bertrand and Wortmann use control theory in order to conceptualize
the problem situation. The problem is then decomposed into relatively simple control subproblems which are solved by means of simple heuristic
Bertrand and Wortmann [lo] and Bertrand [ 1 l]
investigated the relation between the mean job
flow-time and mean workload. In [lo] they showed
that the variations in mean flow-time and in
workload, induced by variations in the rate at
which orders arrive at the shop, are approximately
linearly related to each other. In [l l] a model is
presented of the dynamic behaviour of a system,
where new jobs are released or production is varied
such that the actual workload is kept in accordance with a predetermined workload norm. Typical differences are revealed between workload control by means of capacity variations and by means
The main difficulty with the IOC method is
controlling the input to secondary work centres. In
a production line environment, control of input is
relatively simple and can be done by balancing the
input against the output from the line. In a jobshop with random work flow it is only the input to
the first operation, or ‘gateway’ work centres that
can be similarly controlled at the shop order release level. Controlling the input to the other secondary work centres is considerably more difficult
to do. This is because their input is the combined
output from many previous work centres and varies
with product mix, routing sequence, and the operation processing times. Hence, it is only the foreman who controls the input to the queues of
secondary work centres at the detailed dispatching
A solution to this problem can perhaps be
found in capacity planning methods based on
orders, which do not use the traditional concept of
transit times between operations [20,21,23,6,42].
In traditional scheduling studies, all jobs are
sent to their first operation machine as soon as
they arrive in the shop. However, in industrial
practice jobs are often found to accumulate in the
production control office and issued to the shop as
a batch (Eilon [ 131). Jobs are not released immediately after it becomes theoretically possible to
do so. Rather they are retained in a ‘suspense file’.
This is nothing more than a notation in a scheduling book or at most an open purchase order or
This scheme creates a ‘job pool’ of unreleased
jobs to the shop-floor. Under the job pool concept
the shop consists of a pool of jobs not yet released
to the floor and distinct work centres with a queue
of jobs in front of each. Loading consists of the
release into the shop of a subset of the pool every
scheduling period. The scheduling period can be a
shift, a day, a week, etc. Decisions are not made in
a continuous fashion, but rather they are made
periodically and in a ‘discrete fashion’. The loading algorithms attempt to control the work flow
and to balance the aggregate load ahead of each
work centre for the immediate next scheduling
period, without making time-phased load projections.
Irastorza and Deane [21] and Irastorza [20]
used the job pool concept in connection with a
loading algorithm which utilizes a mixed integer
programming approach, with constraints based on
the current workload assignments at each work
centre. The objective of the program consists of
minimizing the sum of absolute deviations from
the desired aggregate load for each work centre.
The desired load is set by management and provides control over the shop operation. An additional term is introduced in the objective function
to make jobs in the pool increasingly attractive to
be loaded in the shop as their due date approaches. The weight assigned to this term can be
easily controlled by the production planner.
Jendralski [23], Kettner and Jendralski [28], and
Bechte [6], describe heuristic loading algorithms
for choosing jobs from the pool. The planner sets
‘boxes’ of maximum permissible aggregate load
ahead of each work centre, so that an inventory of
work exists always in front of the work centres.
The loading algorithm tries to fill the boxes with
jobs which are picked up from the job pool
according to some priority criteria. In this way,
queues are controlled and job flow-times can be
In contrast to the Karni [24,25] algorithms, the
above algorithms try to control the input of work
to the work centres, assuming known capacities.
Again an algorithm providing facilities for combined input/output
Another weakness of these approaches is that
they control only the output from the job pool by
releasing shop orders to the shop floor. They seem
to ignore the input to the pool, as this is due to
marketing decisions concerning the negotiation and
quotation on customer orders. However, the total
elapsed between the arrival of material and the
delivery date, includes both the time spent in the
pool of unreleased jobs and the time spent on the
shop-floor, i.e. the actual throughput time or job
flow-time. Controlling this total manufacturing
lead time is vital to the higher level objectives of
the firm, above the individual concern of the production or the marketing functions.
Traditional loading techniques as well as the
relatively new techniques of IOC and ‘discrete
decision-making’ concentrate their attention on
balancing the released work to the shop-floor and
reducing throughput times. The hidden role of the
pool, which accounts for the total manufacturing
lead time, is usually ignored. However, reducing
throughput times and balancing the work on the
shop-floor, leads almost inevitably to increases in
the waiting time in the pool of unreleased jobs.
The total manufacturing lead time remains equal
or even longer as in the case where jobs are
released as soon as they become available.
In order to be able to control both ends of the
pool and, consequently, total delivery times, new
planning tools are required. Froehner [ 141 suggests
the requirements of future planning systems include:
(a) Integration of long term planning with production control;
(b) Submitting the planning activities to higher
Gelders and Van Wassenhove 1151 in their re-
view on production planning made a strong plea
towards a functional integration of the planning
activities “ . . . production is just one link in this
chain. A major reason for the gap between production planning theory and production planning
practice is that many researchers deny some of the
obvious interactions of production with other elements of the logistics system”.
The authors take the view that attempting to
manage the lead times to desired norms, is the
appropriate stance to adopt. However in our view
this requires a close cooperation of the production
and marketing functions of the firm, see Tatsiopoulos [41]. Long delivery lead times and poor due
dates performance or poor capacity utilisation are
not necessarily due to bad production scheduling.
Their origin may well be wrong commitments of
the marketing department made a long time ago,
that created major unbalances to the level of work
in the shop. We conclude that too much effort has
been devoted to considering short term scheduling
problems, the lowest level of decision of the three
level decision hierarchy of Gelders and Van Wassenhove’s review [ 151. Control of lead times is best
achieved at the upper decision level of determining
the master schedule, which must be extended to
include the marketing function, the control of the
order acceptance rate and the timing of promises
The present work of the authors [41,42] concentrates on building a hierarchical input/output
control system, integrating the production and
marketing functions of the firm. Quoted jobs, confirmed customer orders waiting for material, unreleased shop orders waiting in the ‘job pool’, released shop orders and queues of items waiting in
front of each work centre form a hierarchical
chain of backlogs connected by input/output
relations. Heuristic algorithms have been developed in
order to control this hierarchy at two levels:
system aims at managing lead times to desired
average lengths by controlling all backlogs in the
hierarchy. However, the system as currently developed applies only to small firms, usually component suppliers of large companies, where the
integration is facilitated by the fact that there are
no organisational and behavourial difficulties due
to clearly set boundaries between the marketing
and the production control departments, as can
happen in larger firms. The question remains for
further research whether such an approach can be
durch belastung[61 W. Bechte, Steuerung der Durchlaufzeit
[I21 R.W. Conway, W.L. Maxwell and L.W. Miller, Theory of
[ 151 L.F. Gelders and L.N. Van Wassenhove,
zur Bestandsregelung in der Werkstattfertigung,
of work station loading, AIIE Trans. (December
[31] J.D.C. Little, A proof of the queueing
G. Plossl and W. Welch. The Role of Top Management
[37] S. Reiter, A system for managing job-shop
