Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
AI and machine learning techniques for managing complexity,
changes and uncertainties in manufacturing
Computer and Automation Research Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Kende u. 13-17, Budapest, P.O. Box 63, H-1518, Hungary
The application of pattern recognition techniques, expert systems, artiﬁcial neural networks, fuzzy systems and nowadays hybrid
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques in manufacturing can be regarded as consecutive elements of a process started two decades ago.
The paper outlines the most important steps of this process and introduces some new results with special emphasis on hybrid AI and
multistrategy machine learning approaches. Agent-based (holonic) systems are highlighted as promising tools for managing
complexity, changes and disturbances in production systems. Further integration of approaches is predicted.
r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Artiﬁcial intelligence; Machine learning; Intelligent manufacturing systems
Growing complexity is one of the most signiﬁcant
characteristics of today’s manufacturing, which is
manifested not only in manufacturing systems, but also
the products to be manufactured, in the processes, and
the company structures (Wiendahl and Scholtissek,
1994). The systems operate in a changing environment
The term of Intelligent Manufacturing Systems
(IMSs) can be attributed to a tentative forecast of
Hatvany and Nemes (1978). In another landmark paper
of Hatvany (1983), IMSs were outlined as the next
generation of manufacturing systems that—utilising the
results of the Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) research—were
expected to solve, within certain limits, unprecedented,
unforeseen problems on the basis of even incomplete
and imprecise information (Hatvany, 1983).
The most frequently cited deﬁnition of learning comes
from Simon (1983): ‘‘Learning denotes changes in the
system that is adaptive in the sense that they enable the
system to do the same task or tasks drawn from the
same population more effectively the next time’’. With
respect to advanced engineering automation, as stated in
Lu (1990), ‘‘we need new computer technologies that
E-mail address: laszlo.monostori@sztaki.hu (L. Monostori).
0952-1976/$ - see front matter r 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
cannot only generate, record, and retrieve information,
but also digest and synthesise information into knowledge and represent this knowledge properly to support
decision-making’’. It can be emphasised that intelligence
is strongly connected with learning, and learning ability
must be an indispensable feature of IMSs (Monostori
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2
gives a short survey of AI and machine learning (ML)
techniques available. Approaches to handling changes
and uncertainties in the process/machine level are
treated in Section 3. System level issues are addressed
in Section 4, while Section 5 attempts to draw some
conclusions and to highlight some future research
2. AI and ML techniques for intelligent machines and
Over the past decades, the ﬁeld of AI has made great
progress toward computerising human reasoning. Symbolic approaches are based on the hypothesis of
symbolic representation—the idea that perception and
cognitive processes can be modelled as acquiring,
manipulating, associating, and modifying symbolic
representations. Expert systems represent the earliest
and most established type of intelligent systems
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
attempting to embody the ‘‘knowledge’’ of a human
expert in a computer program. Knowledge representation in these systems proceeds symbolically in the form
of production rules, frames or semantic networks.
A different approach to intelligent systems involves
constructing computers with architectures and processing capabilities that mimic the processing characteristics of the nervous system. The technology that
attempts to achieve these results is called neural
computing or artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). These
subsymbolic methods work with numeric values and
seem to be more appropriate for dealing with perception
tasks and perhaps even with tasks that call for combined
Investigations conﬁrmed that—similarly to our present conception of biological structures—adaptive ANN
techniques seem to be a viable solution for the lower
level of intelligent, hierarchical control and monitoring
systems where abilities for real-time functioning, uncertainty handling, sensor integration, and learning are
essential features. Since the higher levels of the control
and monitoring hierarchy require mostly symbolic
knowledge representation and processing, the combined
or integrated use of symbolic and subsymbolic methods
is of great importance (Monostori and Barschdorff,
Several techniques for integrating expert systems and
neural networks have emerged over the past few years
spreading from stand-alone models, through transformational, loosely and tightly coupled models to fully
integrated expert system/neural network models
(Kandel and Langholz, 1992). The integration of neural
and fuzzy techniques, which can be considered as a ‘‘full
integration’’, is an approach of high importance.
Over the past years signiﬁcant research efforts have
been devoted to the development and use of Distributed
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAI) techniques (e.g. Bond and
Gasser, 1988). An agent is a real or virtual entity able to
act on itself and on the surrounding world, generally
populated by other agents. Its behaviour is based on its
observations, knowledge and interactions with the world
of other agents. An agent has several important features.
It has capabilities of perception and a partial representation of the environment, can communicate with other
agents, can reproduce child agents, and has own
objectives and an autonomous behaviour (Koussis
et al., 1997). A multi-agent system (MAS) is an artiﬁcial
system composed of a population of autonomous
agents, which co-operate with each other to reach
common goals, while simultaneously pursuing individual objectives (Koussis et al., 1997).
A learning agent (Fig. 1) can be outlined as one
having several modules: ﬁrst, it is the acting module,
which takes percepts both of the external world and its
own state and selects the external actions of the agent.
The learning module improves the actions of the acting
Fig. 1. General model of a learning agent and its interactions with the
module. The learning process could be assisted by a
critic module, which applies external performance
standards, and the problem generator module, which
suggests deliberate exploratory actions, so that the
agent’s view of the world should become more and
more appropriate. (As it will be seen later, in most
applications only some of these modules have been
Learning processes could be classiﬁed by the available
supervised learning: the correct response is provided
reinforcement learning: less feedback is given, since
not the proper action, but only an evaluation of the
unsupervised learning: no evaluation of the action is
While in the ﬁrst two methods the teach-in and
application phases can be clearly distinguished even
when they occur in cycles, in unsupervised learning
usually there is no distinct, predeﬁned teach-in phase; in
most cases the learning system itself should give a signal
While various kinds of simple learning methods work
with examples only, the more powerful learning systems
make use of some background knowledge of the world.
Most research in ML has been concerned with
methods that employ a single learning strategy, that is,
with monostrategy methods. With the growing understanding of the capabilities and limitations of monostrategy methods, there has been an increasing interest
in multistrategy systems that integrate multiple inference
types and/or computational mechanisms in one learning
system. Such systems are expected to learn from wider
scope of input, and be applied to a wider range of
problems than monostrategy methods (Monostori and
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
3. Managing uncertainties and changes in process/
There are various signals (force, torque, temperature,
mechanical vibration, acoustic emission, etc.) which
correlate to the condition of the manufacturing processes, and are the subjects of different control and
monitoring algorithms. However, all the efforts to ﬁnd a
unique signal, which is applicable from different
(technical, economic) points of view, failed. It is to be
expected that the performance of present control and
monitoring systems can be enhanced by the simultaneous processing of different signals (Monostori, 1988).
In order to illustrate the difﬁculty of the problem,
cutting force components and mechanical vibration of
the workpiece holder in face milling are illustrated in
Numerous statistical (e.g. mean value, quadratic
mean value, variance, standard deviation, effective
value, third and forth central moments, skewness,
excess, etc.) and spectral features (e.g. absolute and
relative power in frequency bands, frequency and power
of the largest peak, normalised moment of the spectrum,
and normalised central moment of the spectrum, etc.)
can be computed from the measured signals.
Because of the great number of considered features
and in order to enhance the learning, estimation and
classiﬁcation performances of modelling and monitoring
procedures, sequential forward search (SFS) feature
selection is usually accomplished for every group of
investigations by using the criterion like the following
where Sb is the between class and Sw is the within class
scatter matrix, respectively (Devijver and Kittler, 1982;
Dornfeld, 1990). Through this feature selection, the
relative importance of measured signals in wear estimation/classiﬁcation can also be evaluated.
The pattern recognition (PR)—ANNs—hybrid AI
systems evolution in applications can be found in this
section where the overlapping ﬁelds of tool condition
monitoring (TCM), process modelling and adaptive
control issues will be treated. Special emphasis is laid on
learning abilities, admitting that learning cannot be
treated separately from the other important issues (selfcalibration, signal processing, decision-making, fusion
The application of numerical PR techniques for
monitoring purposes started with linear decision
functions trained iteratively (Sata et al., 1973; Dornfeld
and Bollinger, 1977; Zhang et al., 1982). Fuzzy PR
techniques proved to be efﬁcient tools for dealing with
the uncertain nature of cutting processes (Monostori
et al., 1996). A number of multipurpose monitoring
systems were developed on the basis of PR, multisensor
integration and parallel processing through multiprocessor systems (Weck et al., 1984; Monostori,
The main common features of the developed systems
Fig. 2. Mechanical vibration (up) and force components (down)
modular, reconﬁgurable, multiprocessor structure,
the ability to measure and process relatively numerous analogue and digital signals,
the capability of profound preprocessing of measured
signals, including frequency based analysis as well,
the ability to make complex, multiparameter decisions,
a variety of preprocessing and decision-making
PR is the ﬁeld, where ANNs seem to have the most
potential beneﬁts for practical applications. Taking into
account other favourable features of neural networks
(e.g. parallelism, robustness and compactness), it was
expected that this technique can be used advantageously
Dornfeld applies ANNs for TCM (Dornfeld, 1990).
The applicability of ANNs for multisensor integration
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 3. Structure of the networks for estimation and approximation of ﬂank wear with a 6–6–1 BP network, tool life cycle, target (measured ﬂank
wear in mm) and network output (estimated ﬂank wear).
Fig. 4. Structure of the networks for classiﬁcation and result of a BP networks with 6–6–2 structure, tool life cycle, target for class 1 (worn), outputs
for class 0 (sharp) and for class 1 (worn).
(acoustic emission (AE) and cutting force) was demonstrated. The comparison of results gained by linear
classiﬁers and ANNs’ trained by the back propagation
(BP) technique, outlined the better noise suppression
and classiﬁcation abilities of neural networks.
One of the main—but often neglected—problems in
monitoring of machining processes is how to treat the
varying process parameters. Some possibilities for
incorporating process parameter information into the
learning and classiﬁcation phases were demonstrated in
networks trained under constant process parameters,
networks trained under varying process parameters,
networks incorporating process parameters as inputs.
The ﬁrst investigations aimed at the estimation of the
ﬂank wear of turning tools. The measured wear values
were given as target values for three-layer BP networks
Their learning and approximation performance was
relatively strongly dependent on the considered features
even with constant process parameters. Using steadystate signals, the best performance (max. quadratic error
0.022 mm2, average quadratic error 0.0011 mm2) was
reached with patterns determined from force signal
(second normalised central spectral moment, effective
and mean value of the feed component, and power,
quadratic mean value and mean value of the cutting
component) by a 6–6–1 network with 6 input nodes, 6
hidden elements and 1 output node (Fig. 3).
The performance of these networks decreased when
cutting under operating conditions different from those
In the experiments aiming at state classiﬁcation of
tools in turning, patterns determined from signals
collected between 0 and 0.2 mm ﬂank wear were
assumed to be generated due to cutting with a fresh
tool. Patterns associated with a ﬂank wear level greater
than 0.5 mm were assumed to belong to worn tool
The right side of Fig. 4 shows the performance of a
6–6–2 BP network during the whole tool life cycle with
patterns not incorporated in the learning set. Using the
same 6 features as before, the two network outputs
produce relatively smooth signals during the life cycle
remarkably in the middle period (ﬂank wear between 0.2
and 0.5 mm) too, the period which was not represented
at all in the learning phase. (The network classiﬁes the
tool state into worn category, when output 1 is greater
than output 0.) Recognition ability of 100% was
experienced for test patterns with wear o0.2 mm or
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 5. Approaches to handling varying cutting conditions; using training patterns from the whole operating range of cutting conditions investigated
(left), supplementing networks’ inputs with process parameters (right).
>0.5 mm. During classiﬁcation, target values for
patterns with ﬂank wear between 0.2 and 0.5 mm were
Further investigations showed that networks trained
under constant cutting conditions have limited validity
over a broader range of process parameters. Having
changed the cutting parameters with factors between
0.33 and 1.5, using force features, a classiﬁcation
performance of only 80–96.7% was attained for worn
tools with neural networks with different number of
input nodes (6,12) and hidden elements (2,4,6), keeping
the 100% recognition ability for sharp tools.
Having compared the feature selection criteria Eq. (1)
for patterns generated under constant and varying
process parameters, criteria belonging to patterns
determined under varying constant parameters were
found to be signiﬁcantly smaller (e.g. one-ﬁfth),
therefore, such patterns are much more difﬁcult to
The technique described above is of limited applicability. Changes in process parameters can cause similar
effects in the measured signals as tool failures. Networks
having no information about these conditions can
hardly be expected to operate well over a broader range
The simplest mode to generate networks, which work
prospectively well over a broader range of cutting
parameters, is to use training patterns which characterise sufﬁciently different cutting conditions (left-hand
side of Fig. 5). The other, most sophisticated way is to
supplement networks’ inputs with process parameters
The application of the second type of networks (righthand side of Fig. 5) gave very promising results. Having
completed the force features with process parameters
(depth of cut, d; feed rate, f ; cutting velocity Vc ; and
workpiece diameter, D) and applied the resulted feature
vector as networks’ input during training and classiﬁcation, 100% classiﬁcation ability was attained for known
Moreover, this type of networks gave the best results
for patterns generated under cutting conditions outside
the region considered during the training phase. The
advantage of this approach manifested itself particularly
in experiments where only vibration signals were
considered. Depending on the network structure, a
classiﬁcation performance between 96.5% and 98% was
Comparing the different approaches, the best generalisation ability (networks’ performance for patterns
generated under cutting conditions outside the region
considered during the training phase) was achieved with
the latter variant, i.e. the networks were able to ﬁlter out
the disturbing effects of the varying process parameters,
Due to the numeric, real-time nature of TCM,
comparing with connectionist approaches, relatively
few reports are available regarding the application
symbolic learning techniques in this ﬁeld. In Junkar
et al. (1991), the identiﬁcation of the plunge grinding by
decision tree generation using vibration signals generated by the grinding wheel was described.
The existence of low dimensional chaos in turning was
proved, and a uniﬁed approach for TCM using a
combination of wavelets and fractal dimensions was
Combined structure and parameter learning technique through a neuro-fuzzy (NF) system for the
classiﬁcation of the wear states of milling tools in four
categories was described in Monostori and Egresits
(1997). A four-step learning algorithm integrating
self-organised clustering, competitive learning, and
supervised BP learning techniques was applied for
determining the fuzzy rules and the parameters of the
As an example (Fig. 6), 14 rules have been automatically selected from the possible 1152 ones during the
competitive learning phase in a self-organising way. The
mean values and variances of bell shaped MBFs were
adjusted to reach a kind of optimum regarding the
network error for training patterns (Monostori and
Egresits, 1997). The NF technique with structure and
parameter learning showed superior performance to the
BP solution and previous investigations with a commercial NF system.
Further improvements have been reached by using
genetic algorithms for rule set generation (Egresits et al.,
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 6. NF structure for the four-class problem, after learning, with normalised inputs and output and the learnt membership functions for one of the
Reliable process models are extremely important in
different ﬁelds of computer integrated manufacturing,
such as design, optimisation, control and simulation of
processes and design of equipment (Merchant, 1998;
et al., 1988). Difﬁculties in modelling manufacturing processes are manifold: the great number of
different machining operations, multidimensional, nonlinear, stochastic nature of machining, partially understood relations between parameters, lack of reliable
data, etc. In the CIRP survey on developments and
trends in control and monitoring of machining processes, the necessity of sensor integration, sophisticated
models, multimodel systems and learning ability was
ANNs as learning structures for the lower level of an
intelligent controller were suggested in Rangwala and
Dornfeld (1989). A learning process (Fig. 7) enables the
controller to understand how input variables (such as
feed rate (f ), depth of cut (d), and cutting velocity (v))
affect output variables (such as cutting force (F ), power
(P), temperature (T) and workpiece surface ﬁnish (R)) in
The decision-making approach of Chryssolouris and
Guillot (1988) incorporates several process models that
correlate process state variables such as surface roughness or chip merit mark to process parameters such as
feed rate, cutting speed and tool rake angle. In
Monostori (1993) inverse models of the milling process,
i.e. separate models for three process parameters (axial
depth of cut, cutting speed, and tooth feed) were
generated always using the other two process parameters and force and vibration features as networks’
Analytical models (e.g. for forces or wear occurring in
proﬁle grinding) are available and can be adapted to
Fig. 7. Learning of process models in machining.
Fig. 8. Optimisation and preventive quality assurance for manufacturing processes.
different quantities by using learning strategies. These
analytical models can be combined by simulation
techniques, e.g. by FEM simulation to estimate the
thermoelastic behaviour of the workpiece. ANNs due to
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
their high adaptivity and non-linearity can be advantageously used also here (Fig. 8, Westk.amper et al., 1995).
The combination of multisensor integration, propound
signal processing, adaptive models, process simulation
can lead to the adaptive control of quality.
In Monostori and Viharos (1999) a novel approach
for generating multipurpose models of machining
operations combining ML and search techniques is
described. Simulated annealing search is used for ﬁnding
the unknown parameters of the multipurpose model in
certain applications including modelling of process
The above described investigations for determining
suitable process models for machining operations aimed
at realising powerful adaptive control schemes.
The task to be fulﬁlled can be formulated as follows
(Fig. 9). There exist some limitations on input variables
(e.g. machine limitations), some output variables are to
be kept sufﬁciently close to the desired values and others
can have upper limits (e.g. vibration). The algorithm
suggested in Rangwala and Dornfeld (1989) is based on
an augmented Lagrangian method to minimise a
properly selected combined performance index,
which takes into consideration the above requirements.
Their attractive algorithm, which implies forward and
BP, has resulted in good performance using simulated
As further improvement to this ‘‘batch mode’’
technique (where the learning and synthesis are done
separately) a so-called incremental approach was
introduced, where the learning and synthesis phases
proceed simultaneously. However, during this incremental operation only a part of the possible input space
is scanned, mostly the region near to the operating
point. Tested with values further from this region,
Fig. 9. Synthesis phase of the neural network based adaptive control.
the network showed poor generalisation properties
One of the most well-known models for intelligent
machining was introduced in Chryssolouris et al. (1987).
The control strategy is based on the simultaneous
measurement and processing of different signals (force,
temperature, acoustic emission). These signals are fed
into independent process models. The essential element
of this structure is the synthesis of the different sensor
Two hybrid AI systems for control and monitoring of
manufacturing processes on different hardware and
software bases were described in Barschdorff et al.
(1997). In these hybrid systems, networks outputs are
conveyed to an expert system that provides process
control information. On the base of accumulated
knowledge the hybrid systems inﬂuence the functioning
of the subsymbolic levels, generate optimal process
parameters and inform the user about the actual state of
In the HYBEXP system (Monostori, 1995), an ANN
simulator called NEURECA constitutes the lower,
subsymbolic level (A in Fig. 10). The higher, symbolic
level is based on the commercially available GoldWorks
Both the symbolic and neural subsystems are connected to the machine tool (the machine tool controller
is incorporated). The symbolic part forwards (II)
process parameter information (feed rate, depth of cut,
cutting speed) to the machine tool (C). The generated
indirect signals (e.g. force components, vibration) are
measured and conveyed (III) to the subsymbolic part
In the ﬁgure the machine tool is substituted by a
simulator of the manufacturing process (called SIMURECA, a version of NEURECA), enlightening the test
and demonstration of the system. On the base of
accumulated knowledge and actual process parameters
(cutting speed, feed rate, depth of cut), SIMURECA
estimates the selected features of the force and vibration
signals. These features are forwarded to the NEURECA
subsystem, which fulﬁls the estimation or classiﬁcation
According to previous investigations (Monostori,
1993), reliable ANN models for classiﬁcation of cutting
tools or for tool wear estimation using indirect signals
can only be constructed if they handle process parameter (e.g. cutting speed, feed rate, depth of cut)
information. Therefore, the inputs of ANN models used
in HYBEXP additionally incorporate cutting parameters to indirect signal features. Models for both
classiﬁcation and estimation can be used.
In both cases the results are conveyed to the hybrid
part, where using additional stored knowledge (e.g. the
type and number of cutting tools available, actual
cutting parameters, the parts to be machined, etc.)
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 10. Components of the HYBEXP hierarchically structured hybrid AI system.
different decisions can be made. HYBEXP can initiate,
e.g. machine stop, tool change, modiﬁcation of cutting
parameters (AC control) or change of parts to be
machined. HYBEXP can work also as a decision
3.4. Modelling and management of process chains
To realise adaptive control of a production chain,
models have to be ordered to every stage of the
production and connected by their input–output parameters. In Monostori and Viharos (1999) a software
package ProcessManager is described, which supports
the modelling and adaptive control of processes and
process chains as well. It incorporates (Fig. 11):
determination of the process models in a hybrid way,
by integrating analytical equations, expert knowledge
connection of the single models into a process
chain by coupling input–output model parameters
not limited to models of successive processes in
deﬁnition of eligible intervals or limits for the process
deﬁnition of a cost function to be optimised, etc.
Fig. 12 illustrates the application of ProcessManager
for three-criterion optimisation according to the
interests of the customer (minimisation of the
surface roughness), owner of the company (proﬁt/
productivity maximisation) and the production engineer
(maximisation of process stability through the a/f ratio).
Parameters resulted by the optimisation of the plate
turning operation are illustrated by 3D-plots in Fig. 13.
Ratios of the weighting factors of the three variables
to be optimised are represented along the axes. The
‘surfaces’ are to be used together, i.e., the moving along
the plane marked by Ra and a=f occurs on each of the
diagrams at the same time. The corner marked by q
indicates the position where the criteria of the company
owner is the most important and the movement along
the axes Ra and a=f represents that the criteria of the
customer and the engineer are more and more important
It is worth mentioning that the results illustrated here
are based on ANN models generated with measured
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 11. Hybrid modelling and optimisation of process chains by ProcessManager.
Fig. 12. Hybrid modelling and optimisation by ProcessManager (model of the plate turning operation with optimisation criteria).
4. Intelligent techniques for management of complexity,
In today’s manufacturing systems, difﬁculties arise
from unexpected tasks and events, non-linearities, and a
multitude of interactions while attempting to control
various activities in dynamic shop ﬂoors. Complexity
and uncertainty seriously limit the effectiveness of
conventional control and (off-line, predictive) scheduling approaches.
The performance of manufacturing companies ultimately hinges on their ability to rapidly adapt their
production to current internal and external circumstances. Two main kinds of approaches to dealing with
the enumerated problems are: to enhance the reactivity
of traditionally structured (mostly hierarchical) systems
by sophisticated new control techniques (Tóth and
Erdélyi, 1997; Hornyák and Monostori, 1998; Mezgár
et al., 2000), and to construct decentralised, distributed
systems (Baker, 1998). Another—also overlapping—
way of dealing with changes and disturbances is to
develop adaptive systems, which are able to learn from
A survey of reactive scheduling approaches can be
found in a recently published book chapter (Szelke and
Monostori, 1999). Here we concentrate on distributed,
4.1. Holonic manufacturing systems (HMSs)
Holonic systems, as one of the new paradigms of
manufacturing, consist of autonomous, intelligent,
ﬂexible, distributed, co-operative agents or holons
(Valckenaers et al., 1994; Márkus et al., 1996).
Three types of basic holons, namely resource holons,
product holons and order holons, together with the
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Fig. 13. Parameters resulted by the three-fold optimisation of the plate turning operation.
main information ﬂows between them are deﬁned in
Van Brussel et al. (1998). These basic entities are
structured by using object-oriented concepts such as
aggregation and specialisation. Staff holons are also
foreseen to assist the basic holons in performing their
work. The same paper gives a reference architecture for
holonic manufacturing systems (Van Brussel et al.,
1998). Other authors refer only to two types of basic
building blocks, e.g. order and machine agents in, job
and resource agents, or order and machine (resource)
holons (Monostori et al., 1998). A common feature of
these approaches is that the functions of the order and
product holons are somehow integrated in one basic
Hierarchical, heterarchical and holonic control structures for an assembly cell are compared in Valckenaers
et al. (1994). Holonic systems were found to deliver
better performance in a wider range of situations than
their more conventional counterparts. One of the most
promising feature of the holonic approach is that
it represents a transition between fully hierarchical
and heterarchical systems (Valckenaers et al., 1994;
The industrial acceptance of holonics, however, is
relatively low among others things by reasons of
the relative crudeness of the agent theory and its
the insufﬁcient communication and decision-making
capabilities of present numerical controls,
the high investment costs of a production system
working according to the agent principles,
the seemingly insurmountable difﬁculties in their
stepwise integration into existing production systems
Several approaches are introduced and treated in
Ka! da! r and Monostori (1998) to overcome the above
difﬁculties. Here, approaches are considered where
4.2. Development of agent-based architectures by
There are a number of open questions in holonics
(Ka! da! r et al., 1998), which can be answered by extensive
simulation only. The object-oriented simulation framework for the development and evaluation of distributed
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
manufacturing architectures described in Ka! da! r et al.
(1998) provides a root model that represents a plant and
can contain different agents. The object library incorporates two main agent types: resource agent and order
A plant in the model will contain only one order
agent, which is responsible for order processing, job
announcements and job dispatching between different
resources or groups. A model may incorporate
several resource agents, which can be initialised
during construction (giving the name of the resource,
process-capabilities of the resource, etc.). Only one
information provider, i.e. the registration book, is
The simulation framework is intensively used for
research purposes. By its aid, a new approach, which
breaks with the decision myopia, a common drawback
of distributed approaches, is described in Monostori
4.3. Holonic control of traditional systems by using
In Ka! da! r and Monostori (1998), a novel approach to
holoniﬁcation of manufacturing systems was introduced
based on an extension of the Virtual Manufacturing
(VM) concept (Onosato and Iwata, 1993) where
manufacturing sub-systems can be classiﬁed into four
categories: Real Physical System (RPS), Real Informational System (RIS), Virtual Physical System (VPS),
Virtual Informational System (VIS). VM makes it
possible to simulate manufacturing processes in advance, without using real facilities, and by this, to
accelerate the design and re-design of real manufacturing systems.
A fundamental feature of the VM concept is that it
realises a one-to-one mapping between the real and
virtual systems, i.e. VIS and VPS try to simulate RIS
and RPS, respectively, as exactly as possible. The main
novelty of the approach described in Ka! da! r and
Fig. 15. Concept for holoniﬁcation of traditional manufacturing
Monostori (1998), is the break with the above one-toone mapping, more exactly the use of the VM concept to
control a traditional (centralised/hierarchical) manufacturing system in a holonic way.
The virtual part of the system (Fig. 15) runs in a
holonic way and incorporates order management,
scheduling and control issues. For the realisation of
the virtual part, simulation systems such as the
simulation framework described earlier in this section
can be advantageously used. Resource agents which,
from technological point of view, correspond to the real
resources of the traditional system can be easily
constructed by using the object library of the simulation
framework (Ka! da! r et al., 1998). Order management
Decisions are made in the virtual, holonic system and
conveyed to the VIS of the traditional system. The real
production situation is sensed by the RPS and
forwarded to the VIS, which initiates appropriate
measures in a holonic way. As a summary, the
traditional system shows holonic behaviour.
The holonic information system tested in a virtual
environment has the potential of being used in real
holonic systems. Some requirements for this system-level
holoniﬁcation are also given in Ka! da! r and Monostori
4.4. Approaches to increase the performance of
To overcome the disadvantages associated with
hierarchical control several researchers (e.g. Hatvany,
1985; Dufﬁe and Piper, 1986), proposed a heterarchical
Heterarchical control is a highly distributed form of
control, implemented by a system of independent cooperating processes or agents without centralised or
explicit direct control. Control decisions are reached
through mutual agreement and information is exchanged freely among the participating agents. The
concepts for heterarchical control are derived from
biological metaphors and analogies to the free market
economy (Va! mos, 1983). Therefore, heterarchical control architectures offer similar prospects of reduced
complexity, high ﬂexibility and a high robustness against
disturbances in manufacturing. As such, there is no need
Experiments (Dufﬁe and Prabhu, 1994) and theoretical considerations (Luh and Czerwinsky, 1994) have
partially proven these expectations. However, it has
also turned out that heterarchical control, banning
all forms of hierarchy, cannot guarantee optimum
performance. Even more essential might be that the
behaviour of a system under heterarchical control can
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
4.5. Concept of hierarchy in a distributed system
To combine robustness against disturbances with
performance optimisation and predictability the incorporation of hierarchy in a distributed control system
was proposed in Bongaerts et al. (2000). The resulting
control architecture has a basic structure of autonomous
co-operating local agents, which are capable of negotiation with each other in order to achieve production
targets. That basic structure is extended with central
agents (for instance a scheduler agent) to co-ordinate the
behaviour of the local agents. The resulting architecture
complies with the concepts of holonic manufacturing.
Such a system then has both distributed and centralised
control capabilities. The central agents operate concurrently with local agents and contribute to the same
decision-making processes as the local agents. The local
agents maintain their decision making autonomously,
but may request advice from the central agents. In this
way, the central agents can co-ordinate and optimise the
4.6. Learning issues in agent-based manufacturing
It is extremely difﬁcult or even impossible to correctly
determine the behavioural repertoire and concrete
activities of a MAS a priori (Shen et al., 2000). In the
referred paper important aspects of learning in a multiagent setting are discussed, i.e. why, when, where and
what to learn. In this domain both ‘‘learning from
history’’ and ‘‘learning from the future’’ can be
advantageously used. Concerning the latter, let us refer
to the simulation framework described in this section,
which can be used as a tool for learning from the future.
In agent-based manufacturing systems a number of
system level and resource level parameters can be the
subject of a learning process, an important issue is, how
Having recognised the importance of learning in
agent-based manufacturing architectures, research was
initiated at the Computer and Automation Research
Institute to develop agent-based manufacturing control
architectures with increased and more balanced performance. The ﬁrst results are treated in Ka! da! r and
Monostori (2001). Two attempts to enhance the
performance of agent-based manufacturing systems
using adaptation/learning techniques were outlined in
the paper. Some agent-level parameters were introduced, by which the system behaviour could be tuned.
The research was carried out with the help of a
simulation framework presented here earlier.
It was assumed that the goal of the agents is to
maximise their proﬁt and the evaluation of the bids is
done on cost basis. Each agent incorporates a rule base
with which it can locally decide on the cost factor to be
applied for an announced task. The preconditions of
Comparison some performance measures of a simulated manufacturing system without and with cost factor adaptation
these rules are the utilisation of the resource and the
ratio between the won and lost bids. The data about
the bidding history are stored locally for each agent in
the table of machine abilities and history (Ka! da! r and
Table 1 illustrates the results recorded during two
experimental runs. In the ﬁrst case, the resource agents
were not permitted to change their cost factors, while in
the second case they were entitled to do so.
Some performance measures of the system are
enumerated in the ﬁrst column. The second column
illustrates the results without cost factor adaptation,
while the third column shows the results achieved with
cost factor adaptation. In the second experiment the
precondition limits for the low and high level utilisation
were set to 40% and 80%, respectively, while the
resource agents were permitted to change their cost
The simulation results demonstrate that the major
advantage of the proposed solution is the more
equilibrated usage of resources. Moreover, several
performance measures such as maximum tardiness and
the makespan are better with cost factor adaptation
Learning process models, cause-effect relations, automatically recognising different process changes and
degradation and intervening in the process in order to
ensure safe processes and product qualities are sophisticated approaches with high potential. They are the
subjects of intensive research and development work
world-wide. The complexity of the problem and the
associated uncertainties necessitate the application of
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
learning techniques to get closer to working IMSs. In
correspondence with a recently published larger survey
on ML approaches to manufacturing (Monostori et al.,
1996), the following main trends can be enumerated:
attributable mostly to the results of ANN research—
in contrast to the situation 8–10 years ago, when they
were considered as ﬁelds hardly manageable with AI
techniques—the area of process modelling, monitoring and control came to the fore;
in recent years ANN-based learning is the dominant
ANNs are natural tools at lower levels of IMs where
abilities of sensor integration, signal processing,
uncertainty handling, real-time and adaptive functioning are required, but
ANNs ﬁnd their applications on nearly every, also on
non-sensory domains of manufacturing, as general
information processing blocks with learning abilities;
development and routine production of programmable ANN chips (e.g., cellular neural networks
(Roska and Rodriguez-Vazquez, 2000) will give a
new, spectacular impulse to ANN applications in
manufacturing, especially with the rapid spread of
neuro-fuzzy approaches manifest themselves as prospective tools of numerous problems in manufacturing where real-time nature, learning ability, handling
of uncertainty and both symbolic and numeric
as the considerable number of projects with multistrategy learning methods shows, the future belongs
to these integrated approaches (Egresits et al., 1998).
Distributed, holonic-like systems represent viable
alternatives to hierarchical and heterarchical structures
and the corresponding reactive scheduling approaches.
Both of these—apparently distinct—lines can be advantageously used in rapidly changing production
environments, however, none of them can be regarded
as a universal tool. Even the application of such
powerful global optimisation techniques as GAs, are
not appropriate for very large problems, and as
centralised approaches, are not totally devoid of all
the known drawbacks of centralised/hierarchical control
systems (Monostori et al., 1998). The multi-agent
approach also becomes unrealistic beyond a given
problem size, ﬁrst of all due to the rapidly increasing
communication burden. Consequently, both directions
crave for some kind of aggregation (Van Brussel et al.,
1998). There is a scope for temporal or permanent
hierarchies also in holonic architectures (Bongaerts et al.,
2000). By this way, the amount of necessary communication can be decreased, and the holonic concept can
be expanded to the level of extended or virtual
A fundamental issue in distributed systems is how to
ensure global performance with selﬁsh agents pursuing
their own goals (Hatvany, 1985). The integration of
scheduling agents as a kind of staff holons (Van Brussel
et al., 1998) into the architecture, can contribute to
achieving global coherence in distributed systems
The object-oriented simulation framework described
in the paper, is expected to provide the necessary
framework for further research addressing such
fundamental issues of distributed manufacturing as
agent structures, communication protocols, group formation, negotiation, global versus local optima, scalability, system tuning, agents’ behaviour, learning at
system and agent levels (Monostori et al., 1996).
The further integration of more traditional AI
and ML techniques with the agent-based approach in
the ﬁeld of intelligent machines can be predicted
resulting in systems with emergent behaviour (Ueda
This work was partially supported by the National
Research Foundation, Hungary, Grant Nos. T 026486
Baker, A.D., 1998. A survey of factory control algorithms that can be
implemented in a multi-agent heterarchy: dispatching, scheduling
and pull. Journal of Manufacturing System 17 (4), 297–320.
K!ad!ar, N., 1997. Approaches to coupling connectionist and
expert systems in intelligent manufacturing. Computers in Industry
Bond, A.H., Gasser, L., 1988. Readings in DAI. Morgan-Kaufmann,
Bongaerts, L.L., Monostori, D., Mcfarlane, D., K!ad!ar, B., 2000.
Hierarchy in distributed shop ﬂoor control. Computers in Industry
Bukkapatnam, S., Lakhtakia, A., Kumara, S., 1995. Analysis of sensor
signals shows turning on a lathe is chaotic. Physics Reviews E 52
Byrne, G., Dornfeld, D., Inasaki, I., Ketteler, G., Konig,
1995. Tool condition monitoring (TCM)—the status of research
and industrial applications. CIRP Annals 44 (2), 541–568.
Chryssolouris, G., Guillot, M., 1988. An AI approach to the selection
of process parameters in intelligent machining. Proceedings of the
Winter Annual Meeting of the ASME on Sensors and Controls for
Chryssolouris, G., Guillot, M., Domroese, M., 1987. An approach to
intelligent machining. Proceedings, 1987 American Control Conference, Minneapolis, MN, June 10–12, pp. 152–160.
Devijver, P.A., Kittler, J., 1982. Pattern Recognition—A Statistical
Dornfeld, D.A., 1990. Neural network sensor fusion for tool condition
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Dornfeld, W.H., Bollinger, J.G., 1977. On line frequency domain
detection of production machinery malfunctions. Proceedings of
the 18th International Machine Tool Design and Research
Dufﬁe, N.A., Piper, R.S., 1986. Non-hierarchical control of manufacturing systems. Journal of Manufacturing Systems 5 (2), 94–107.
Dufﬁe, N.A., Prabhu, V.V., 1994. Real-time distributed scheduling of
heterarchical manufacturing systems. Journal of Manufacturing
Egresits, Cs., Monostori, L., Horny!ak, J., 1998. Multistrategy learning
approaches to generate and tune fuzzy control structures and their
applications in manufacturing. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 9 (4), 323–329.
Hatvany, J., 1983. The efﬁcient use of deﬁcient information. CIRP
Hatvany, J., 1985. Intelligence and co-operation in heterarchic
manufacturing systems. Robotics & Computer-Integrated Manufacturing 2 (2), 101–104.
Hatvany, J., Nemes, L., 1978. Intelligent manufacturing systems - a
tentative forecast, In: A Link Between Science and Applications of
Automatic Control, Proceedings of the VIIth IFAC World
Congress, Vol. 2, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 895–899.
Horny!ak, J., Monostori, L., 1998. Genetic algorithms for predictive
and reactive scheduling of manufacturing systems. Proceedings of
ICME98 CIRP International Seminar on Intelligent Computation
in Manufacturing Engineering, Capri, Italy, pp. 213–220.
Junkar, M., Filipic, B., Bratko, I., 1991. Identifying the grinding
process by means of inductive machine learning. Proceedings of the
First Workshop of the Intelligent Manufacturing Systems Seminars
on Learning in IMSs, Budapest, Hungary, pp. 195–204.
K!ad!ar, B., Monostori, L., 1998. Agent based control of novel and
traditional production systems. Proceedings of ICME98 CIRP Int.
Seminar on Intelligent Computation in Manufacturing Engineering, Capri, Italy, pp. 31–38 (key-note paper).
K!ad!ar, B., Monostori, L., 2001. Approaches to increase the
performance of agent-based production systems. Engineering of
Intelligent Systems Lecture Notes in AI 2070 IEA/AIE-01 14th
International Conference on Industrial & Engineering Applications
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence & Expert Systems, June 4–7, Budapest,
K!ad!ar, B., Monostori, L., Szelke, E., 1998. An object oriented
framework for developing distributed manufacturing architectures.
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 9 (2), 173–179.
Kandel, A., Langholz, G., 1992. Hybrid Architectures for Intelligent
Koussis, K., Pierreval, H., Mebarki, N., 1997. Using multi-agent
architecture in FMS for dynamic scheduling. Journal of Intelligent
Lu, S.C.-Y., 1990. Machine learning approaches to knowledge
synthesis and integration tasks for advanced engineering automation. Computers in Industry 15, 105–120.
Luh, P., Czerwinsky, L.S., 1994. Scheduling products with bill of
material using an improved Lagrangian relaxation technique.
Transactions on Robotics and Automation 10(2), p. 99.
M!arkus, A., Kis, T., V!ancza, J., Monostori, L., 1996. A market
approach to holonic manufacturing. CIRP Annals 45 (1), 433–436.
Merchant, M.E., 1998. An interpretive look at 20th century research
on modelling of machining. Inaugural Address, Proceedings of the
CIRP International Workshop on Modelling of Machining
Mezg!ar, I., Monostori, L., K!ad!ar, B., Egresits, Cs., 2000. Knowledgebased hybrid techniques combined with simulation: application to
robust manufacturing systems. Chapter 25 in the book: Knowledge-based Systems, Academic Press, New York, pp. 755–790.
Monostori, L., 1986. Learning procedures in machine tool monitoring.
Monostori, L., 1988. Signal processing and decision making in
machine tool monitoring systems. Proceedings of the Manufacturing International’88 Symposium, Vol. I., Product and Process
Design, Atlanta, GA, April 17–20, pp. 277–284.
Monostori, L., 1993. A step towards intelligent manufacturing:
modelling and monitoring of manufacturing processes through
artiﬁcial neural networks. CIRP Annals 42 (1), 485–488.
Monostori, L., 1995. Hybrid AI approaches for supervision and
control of manufacturing processes. Key-note paper, Proceedings
AC’95 IV International Conference on Monitoring & Automation
Supervision in Manufacturing Miedzeszyn, Poland, pp. 37–47.
Monostori, L., Egresits, Cs., 1997. On hybrid learning and its
application in intelligent manufacturing. Computers in Industry
Monostori, L., Barschdorff, D., 1992. Artiﬁcial neural networks in
intelligent manufacturing. Robotics and Computer-Integrated
Monostori, L., Viharos, Zs.J., 1999. Multipurpose modelling and
optimisation of production processes and process chains by
combining machine learning and search techniques. Proceedings
of The 32nd CIRP International Seminar on Manufacturing
Monostori, L., M!arkus, A., Van Brussel, H., Westk.amper, E., 1996.
Machine learning approaches to manufacturing. CIRP Annals 45
Monostori, L., K!ad!ar, B., Horny!ak, J., 1998. Approaches to manage
changes and uncertainties in manufacturing. CIRP Annals 47 (1),
Onosato, M., Iwata, K., 1993. Development of a virtual manufacturing system by integrating product models and factory models.
Rangwala, S.S., Dornfeld, D.A., 1989. Learning and optimisation of
machining operations using computing abilities of neural networks.
Roska, T., Rodriguez-Vazquez, A., 2000. Towards the Visual
Sata, T., Matsushima, T., Nagakura, T., Kono, E., 1973. Learning and
recognition of the cutting states by the spectrum analysis. CIRP
Shen, W., Maturana, F., Norrie, D.H., 2000. Enhancing the
performance of an agent-based manufacturing system through
learning and forecasting. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 11,
Simon, H.A., 1983. Why should machines learn? In: Michalski, R.,
Carbonell, J., Mitchell, T. (Eds.), Machine Learning: An
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approach. Tioga Press, Palo Alto, CA,
Szelke, E., Monostori, L., 1999. Reactive scheduling in real-time
production control, Chapter. In: Bandimarte, P., Villa, A. (Eds.),
Modeling Manufacturing Systems. Springer, Berlin, pp. 65–113.
H.K., Wulsberg, J.P., Kals, H.J.J., Konig,
Luttervelt, C.A., 1988. Developments and trends in monitoring
and control of machining processes. CIRP Annals 37 (2), 611–622.
T., Erd!elyi, F., 1997. The role of optimisation and robustness in
planning and control of discrete manufacturing processes. Proceedings of The Second World Congress on Intelligent Manufacturing
Processes & Systems, Budapest, pp. 205–210.
Ueda, K., M!arkus, A., Monostori, L., Kals, H.J.J., Arai, T., 2001.
Emergent synthesis methodologies for manufacturing. CIRP
Valckenaers, P., Bonneville, F., Van Brussel, H., Bongaerts, L., Wyns,
J., 1994. Results of the holonic system benchmark at KULeuven.
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on CIM and
Automation Technology, Troy, New York, pp. 128–133.
V!amos, T., 1983. Co-operative systems—an evolutionary perspective.
IEEE Continuous Systems Magazine 3 (2), 9–14.
L. Monostori / Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 16 (2003) 277–291
Van Brussel, H., Wyns, J., Valckenaers, P., Bongaerts, L., Peeters, P.,
1998. Reference architecture for holonic manufacturing systems.
Proceedings of the VDI/VDEGMR Tagung Verfahren und Systeme zur technischen Fehlerdiagnose, Langen, FRG, pp. 139–154.
Westk.amper, E., Lange, D., Hoffmeister, H.-W., 1995. Safe
abrasive processes through adaptive control under highly chaotic
conditions, Proceedings of the IV. International Conference
On Monitoring and Automatic Supervision in Manufacturing,
Wiendahl, H.-P., Scholtissek, P., 1994. Management and control of
complexity in manufacturing. CIRP Annals 43 (2), 533–540.
Zhang, Y.Z., Liu, Z.F., Pau, L.X., Liu, Y.I., Yang, W.B., 1982.
Recognition of cutting states for the difﬁcult-to-cut materials.
Application of the pattern recognition techniques. CIRP Annals 31
